   12 min read

   Is Consciousness Universal?

   Panpsychism, the ancient doctrine that consciousness is universal,
   offers some lessons in how to think about subjective experience today

--
   did. Why deny them? Why would God resurrect people but not dogs? This
   core Christian belief in human exceptionalism did not make any sense to
   me. Whatever consciousness and mind are and no matter how they relate
   to the brain and the rest of the body, I felt that the same principle
   must hold for people and dogs and, by extension, for other animals as
--
   Buddhism and its emphasis on the universal nature of mind. Indeed, when
   I spent a week with His Holiness the Dalai Lama earlier in 2013 [see
   “The Brain of Buddha,” Consciousness Redux; Scientific American Mind,
   July/August 2013], I noted how often he talked about the need to reduce
   the suffering of “all living beings” and not just “all people.” My
--
   mice, whales, dogs, cats and monkeys—are capable of sophisticated,
   learned, nonstereotyped behaviors that would be associated with
   consciousness if a human were to carry out such actions. Precursors of
   behaviors thought to be unique to people are found in many species. For
   instance, bees are capable of recognizing specific faces from
--

   Some people point to language and the associated benefits as being the
   unique defining feature of consciousness. Conveniently, this viewpoint
   rules out all but one species, Homo sapiens (which has an ineradicable
   desire to come out on top), as having sentience. Yet there is little
   reason to deny consciousness to animals, preverbal infants [see “The
   Conscious Infant,” Consciousness Redux; Scientific American Mind,
   September/October 2013] or patients with severe aphasia, all of whom
   are mute.
--
   I will defend a narrowed, more nuanced view: namely that any complex
   system, as defined below, has the basic attributes of mind and has a
   minimal amount of consciousness in the sense that it feels like
   something to be that system. If the system falls apart, consciousness
   ceases to be; it doesn't feel like anything to be a broken system. And
   the more complex the system, the larger the repertoire of conscious
--
   to hold the weight of philosophy. But from whence does this experience
   come? Materialists invoke something they call emergentism to explain
   how consciousness can be absent in simple nervous systems and emerge as
   their complexity increases. Consider the wetness of water, its ability
   to maintain contact with surfaces. It is a consequence of
--
   complex neurons.

   A more principled solution is to assume that consciousness is a basic
   feature of certain types of so-called complex systems (defined in some
   universal, mathematical manner). And that complex systems have
--
   charge is an intrinsic property of these particles. Electrical charge
   does not emerge from noncharged matter. It is the same, goes the logic,
   with consciousness. Consciousness comes with organized chunks of
   matter. It is immanent in the organization of the system. It is a
   property of complex entities and cannot be further reduced to the
--
   flaws. One is known as the problem of aggregates. Philosopher John
   Searle of the University of California, Berkeley, expressed it
   recently: “Consciousness cannot spread over the universe like a thin
   veneer of jam; there has to be a point where my consciousness ends and
   yours begins.” Indeed, if consciousness is everywhere, why should it
   not animate the iPhone, the Internet or the United States of America?
   Furthermore, panpsychism does not explain why a healthy brain is
--
   that conscious experience is a fundamental aspect of reality and is
   identical to a particular type of information—integrated information.
   Consciousness depends on a physical substrate but is not reducible to
   it. That is, my experience of seeing an aquamarine blue is inexorably
   linked to my brain but is different from my brain.
--
   integrated part of your view. Whatever information you are conscious of
   is wholly and completely presented to your mind; it cannot be
   subdivided. Underlying this unity of consciousness is a multitude of
   causal interactions among the relevant parts of your brain. If parts of
   the brain become fragmented and balkanized, as occurs in deep sleep or
   in anesthesia, consciousness fades.

   To be conscious, then, you need to be a single, integrated entity with
--
   extent to which this network is integrated. From this calculation, the
   theory derives a single number, &PHgr (pronounced “fi”) [see “A Theory
   of Consciousness,” Consciousness Redux; Scientific American Mind,
   July/August 2009]. Measured in bits, &PHgr denotes the size of the
   conscious repertoire associated with the network of causally
--
   random, &PHgr will be low. If the organism has many neurons and is
   richly endowed with synaptic connections, &PHgr will be high.
   Basically, &PHgr captures the quantity of consciousness. The quality of
   any one experience—the way in which red feels different from blue and a
   color is perceived differently from a tone—is conveyed by the
--

   Integrated information makes very specific predictions about which
   brain circuits are involved in consciousness and which ones are
   peripheral players (even though they might contain many more neurons,
   their anatomical wiring differs). The theory has most recently been
   used to build a consciousness meter to assess, in a quantitative
   manner, the extent to which anesthetized subjects or severely
   brain-injured patients, such as Terri Schiavo, who died in Florida in
   2005, are truly not conscious or do have some conscious experiences but
   are unable to signal their pain and discomfort to their loved ones [see
   “A Consciousness Meter,” Consciousness Redux; Scientific American Mind,
   March/April 2013].

   IIT addresses the problem of aggregates by postulating that only “local
   maxima” of integrated information exist (over elements and spatial and
   temporal scales): my consciousness, your consciousness, but nothing in
   between. That is, every person living in the U.S. is, self by self,
   conscious, but there is no superordinate consciousness of the U.S.
   population as a whole.

--
   that is different from zero. Only integrated systems do. A bunch of
   disconnected neurons in a dish, a heap of sand, a galaxy of stars or a
   black hole—none of them are integrated. They have no consciousness.
   They do not have mental properties.

--
   Panpsychism in the West. David Skrbina. MIT Press, 2005.

   Consciousness: Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist. Christof Koch.
   MIT Press, 2012.

   Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness: An Updated Account.
   Giulio Tononi in Archives Italiennes de Biologie, Vol. 150, No. 4,
   pages 293–329; December 2012.
