     article

   Quantifying arousal and awareness in altered states of consciousness
   using interpretable deep learning
   Download PDF
--
     * Published: 25 February 2022

Quantifying arousal and awareness in altered states of consciousness using
interpretable deep learning

--
Subjects

     * Disorders of consciousness
     * Predictive markers
     * Sleep
--
Abstract

   Consciousness can be defined by two components: arousal (wakefulness)
   and awareness (subjective experience). However, neurophysiological
   consciousness metrics able to disentangle between these components have
   not been reported. Here, we propose an explainable consciousness
   indicator (ECI) using deep learning to disentangle the components of
   consciousness. We employ electroencephalographic (EEG) responses to
   transcranial magnetic stimulation under various conditions, including
   sleep (n = 6), general anesthesia (n = 16), and severe brain injury
--
   In addition, parietal regions appear most relevant for quantifying
   arousal and awareness. This indicator provides insights into the neural
   correlates of altered states of consciousness.

Similar content being viewed by others

Analyzing brain-activation responses to auditory stimuli improves the
diagnosis of a disorder of consciousness by non-linear dynamic analysis of
the EEG

--

Dynamical structure-function correlations provide robust and generalizable
signatures of consciousness in humans

   Article Open access 30 September 2024

Neural complexity is a common denominator of human consciousness across
diverse regimes of cortical dynamics

--
Introduction

   Responsiveness is often thought to reflect consciousness, and for a
   long time, unresponsiveness was considered as a surrogate of
   unconsciousness. However, consciousness and responsiveness are two
   different concepts^1. Consciousness is considered to be absent during
   sleep or anesthesia, but in certain instances, subjective experience
   can still occur (e.g., dreaming)^2,3. Similarly, consciousness has been
   described as a result of both arousal and awareness components^4.
   Arousal refers to the overall state of alertness (or wakefulness). In
--
   awareness is inferred by the ability to follow commands.

   Various levels of consciousness exist in physiological,
   pharmacological, and pathological modifications of consciousness
   (Table 1). In non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep with no subsequent
   reports of subjective experiences, both arousal and awareness are low.
--
   patients under anesthesia may also be conscious of their environment
   during a surgical procedure, which is referred to as connected
   consciousness. These patients exhibit the ability to follow commands
   using the isolated forearm technique^8, without recollection upon
   awakening. Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (UWS) describes patients
--
   by positron emission tomography). This peculiar state has been termed
   non-behavioral MCS or MCS*^13,14,15.
   Table 1 Schematic representation of different states of consciousness
   according to low or high arousal and awareness: the plus sign indicates
   high arousal or awareness, whereas the minus sign indicates low arousal
--
   Full size table

   An effective measure of consciousness, labeled perturbational
   complexity index (PCI), was developed from electroencephalographic
   (EEG) responses to direct and noninvasive cortical perturbation with
--
   evoked by TMS. This index was validated in a large benchmark population
   to derive an empirical cutoff (PCI* = 0.31) that reliably discriminates
   between unconsciousness (PCI[max] ≤ PCI*: NREM sleep; midazolam-,
   propofol- and xenon-induced anesthesia) and consciousness
   (PCI[max] > PCI*: REM sleep; wakefulness; ketamine-induced anesthesia;
   and conscious brain-injured patients)^17. However, PCI cannot
--
   wakefulness. In addition, multiple trials are required to compute
   PCI^16,17. A few studies have attempted to develop an objective measure
   of consciousness from resting-state EEG brain activity^3,4,18,19.
   Interestingly, the spectral exponent, which quantifies the slope of
   power spectral density of resting-state EEG activity, is another
   measure of consciousness that is highly correlated with PCI and allows
   distinguishing between ketamine and propofol or xenon-induced
   anesthesia^3. In addition, when low- (1–20 Hz) and high-band (20–40 Hz)
--
   NREM sleep; thus, it distinguishes between different arousal levels but
   not awareness levels. Therefore, an alternative measure to
   simultaneously disentangle the two components of consciousness,
   requiring fewer trials, would be a valuable and necessary tool.

--
   decisions of CNNs using LRP.

   In this work, we develop a metric, called the explainable consciousness
   indicator (ECI), to simultaneously quantify the two components of
   consciousness—arousal and awareness—using CNN. The processed
   time-series EEG data were used as an input of the CNN. Unlike PCI,
   which relies on source modeling and permutation-based statistical
--
   healthy participants during NREM sleep with no subjective experience,
   REM sleep with subjective experience, and healthy wakefulness to
   consider each component of consciousness (i.e., low/high arousal and
   low/high awareness) with the aim to analyze correlations between the
   proposed ECI and the three states, namely NREM, REM, and wakefulness.
--
   ketamine-induced anesthesia and no conscious experience during
   propofol- and xenon-induced anesthesia. Finally, TMS–EEG data were
   collected from patients with disorders of consciousness (DoC), which
   includes patients diagnosed as UWS and MCS patients. We hypothesized
   that our proposed ECI can clearly distinguish between the two
   components of consciousness under physiological, pharmacological, and
   pathological conditions.

   To verify the proposed indicator, we next compared ECI^awa with PCI,
   which is a reliable index for consciousness. Then, we applied ECI to
   additional resting-state EEG data acquired in the anesthetized
   participants and patients with DoC. We hypothesize that if CNN can
   learn characteristics related to consciousness, it could calculate ECI
   accurately even without TMS in the proposed framework. In terms of
   clinical applicability, it is important to use the classifier from the
--
   using LRP to interpret ECI^30. We show that proposed ECI using
   interpretable deep learning distinguishes arousal and awareness between
   normal consciousness, sleep, anesthesia, and patients with DoC.
   Furthermore, we show that the parietal region is most closely related
   to quantifying arousal and awareness in altered states of
   consciousness.

Results
--
   condition did not include resting-state EEG, and one participant under
   ketamine-mediated anesthesia was missing in resting-state EEG. b
   Schematic framework for determining the explainable consciousness
   indicator (ECI). In step 1, raw EEG signals were converted into a
   spatio-spectral or spatiotemporal 3D matrix. In step 2, the converted
   3D feature was used on a convolutional neural network in the two
   components of consciousness: arousal and awareness. In each arousal and
   awareness state, the EEG data were trained as two classes (low versus
   high). For example, for awareness, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep with
--
   session j. The averaged probability \({C}_{j}\) is ECI^aro and ECI^awa
   on the x- and y-axes, respectively. Therefore, we represented the 2D
   consciousness indicator for the two components of consciousness. In the
   final step, we checked which brain signals the model has learned and
   why it made such a decision using layer-wise relevance propagation
--
   purple dots indicate the use of ketamine, propofol, and xenon,
   respectively. In addition, cross markers indicate normal wakefulness
   before each anesthetic. c In patients with disorders of consciousness,
   the orange and purple dots indicate patients in the minimally conscious
   state (MCS) and with unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (UWS),
--
   conditions. PCI in all three conditions was consistent with the optimal
   cutoff (0.31^16,17) that maximizes the accuracy of the distinction
   between consciousness and unconsciousness in a benchmark population.
   For ECI, the optimal cutoff of 0.5 perfectly distinguished low or high
   states of arousal and awareness in the physiological, pharmacological,
--
   and xenon, respectively. In addition, cross markers indicate normal
   wakefulness before each anesthetic. b In patients with disorders of
   consciousness, the orange and purple dots indicate MCS and UWS
   patients, respectively.
   Full size image
--
   To demonstrate that the method can be easily applied to a new set of
   patients (without additional training) to identify their state of
   consciousness in a clinical setting, we computed ECI using the hold-out
   approach. The dataset in the patients with DoC was split between the
   training and evaluation sets with respective ratios of 0.75 and 0.25.
--
   data on its own, our indicator can be computed regardless of whether
   TMS is applied or its location. Therefore, ECI is a significantly
   practical and reliable indicator to evaluate levels of consciousness
   under various conditions. Our analyses using LRP highlighted the major
   role of the parietal region in determining consciousness, as the
   classifier primarily uses brain activity in this lobe for predicting
   low and high states of arousal and awareness.
--
   than that of spatio-spectral information. Using our framework, it was
   shown that temporal information discriminates different levels of
   consciousness more clearly than spectral information, as the functional
   connectivity associated with consciousness changes in both space and
   time^37. However, this does not imply that temporal information is more
   important than spectral information for distinguishing consciousness.
   Temporal information has more distinct characteristics than spectral
   information for predicting the state of consciousness in the proposed
   framework. Nevertheless, PCI also used spatiotemporal dynamics in
   TMS-evoked responses^16, which is significantly important for
   distinguishing consciousness.

   We applied transfer learning to a single domain as well as multiple
--
   they were highly relevant in the parietal region. This EEG feature,
   which distinguishes high and low states in arousal and awareness, can
   be interpreted in line with the posterior hot zone of consciousness^40.
   Local changes in this parietal region are associated with the
   occurrence of dreaming and unconscious sleep^41,42, and our framework
--
   propofol is primarily observed in the posterior hot zone^45 and the
   posterior main hub is disrupted during anesthesia-induced alteration of
   consciousness^7. In UWS patients, TMS triggered a local and slow
   response similar to NREM sleep and general anesthesia, whereas MCS
   patients showed complex TMS-evoked responses^33. Similarly, differences
--
   an appropriate design of our model as the classification decision was
   primarily based on EEG signals over the parietal region, which is
   suggested to be a hot spot of consciousness, compared to the frontal
   region^43. The difference in the parietal region could be clearly
   identified through correct trials during sleep and healthy wakefulness.
   It is meaningful that the frontal region contributed less than parietal
   regions in the context of the controversy regarding the spatial
   localization of the neural correlates of consciousness^40,45.
   Considering the subcortical influences related to striatal-thalamic
   circuits, it has been recently observed that the parietal region
   contributes more to the levels of consciousness than the frontal
   region^47. The implication of the parietal cortex in consciousness has
   also been demonstrated in other neuroimaging modalities, such as
   functional magnetic resonance imaging^48 and magnetoencephalography^49.
--
   In conclusion, we proposed ECI as a neurophysiological indicator to
   simultaneously discriminate the levels of arousal and awareness in
   modified states of consciousness. This tool allows disentangling the
   levels of consciousness, with a single measure, in different clinical
   settings such as monitoring surgical interventions (i.e.,
   anesthesia-induced states) and diagnosing patients with DoC. This
--
   resting-state EEG without TMS, and requires fewer trials. Therefore,
   the proposed indicator can be a reliable discriminator and valuable
   tool as an objective measure of consciousness. As parietal regions
   appear to be the most relevant for classification, an EEG configuration
   around that area could be sufficient if ECI is used in clinical
   practice. These findings could be useful in diagnosing severely
   brain-injured patients and monitoring their levels of consciousness in
   real-time, especially in clinical settings where time constraints
   preclude long-duration assessment. The proposed reliable ECI can
   provide insights into the classification of conscious levels using deep
   learning and neural correlates of consciousness.

Methods
--
   written informed consent was obtained from legal representatives of all
   patients. All of them fell into a coma due to brain injury and
   presented a prolonged state of impaired consciousness. The inclusion
   criteria included (i) older than 18 years and (ii) diagnosis of DoC
   following a severe acquired brain injury. The exclusion criteria for
--
   V GPU. We used the LRP toolbox^30 for CNN classification and
   interpretation. The CNN was applied to the two components of
   consciousness (arousal and awareness). In each architecture, we
   inserted five convolutional layers with 2D filters for the deep neural
   network. The first layer with 100 filters and the second layer with 80
--
   the relevance score resulting from the LRP as there is an ongoing
   debate regarding which brain area, i.e., the front versus the back, is
   related to consciousness^40. We also included the temporal region as
   activation in the NREM sleep increases in this region^70.

--
   TMS^16. PCI ranges between 0 (minimum complexity) and 1 (maximum
   complexity). Previous extensive validation of PCI provided an empirical
   cutoff (PCI* = 0.31) to discriminate between consciousness and
   unconsciousness^17.

Statistical analysis
--

   To investigate the discrimination of ECI in each state of
   consciousness, the feedforward network was trained with 20 hidden
   layers using the LOPO approach. For each output class, the AUC,
   sensitivity, and specificity were calculated using ROC analysis.
--

    1. Sanders, R. D., Tononi, G., Laureys, S. & Sleigh, J. W.
       Unresponsiveness unconsciousness. Anesthesiology 116, 946–959
       (2012).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
    2. Darracq, M. et al. Evoked alpha power is reduced in disconnected
       consciousness during sleep and anesthesia. Sci. Rep. 8, 16664
       (2018).
       Article  ADS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
    3. Colombo, M. A. et al. The spectral exponent of the resting EEG
       indexes the presence of consciousness during unresponsiveness
       induced by propofol, xenon, and ketamine. Neuroimage 189, 631–644
       (2019).
--
       level in humans. eLife 9, e55092 (2020).
       Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
    5. Mashour, G. A. & Hudetz, A. G. Neural correlates of unconsciousness
       in large-scale brain networks. Trends Neurosci. 41, 150–160 (2018).
       Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
    6. Casarotto, S. et al. Exploring the neurophysiological correlates of
       loss and recovery of consciousness: perturbational complexity in
       Brain Function and Responsiveness in Disorders of Consciousness (ed
       Monti, M. M.) 93–104 (Springer, 2016).
    7. Bonhomme, V. et al. General anesthesia: a probe to explore
       consciousness. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 13, 36 (2019).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
    8. Sanders, R. D. et al. Incidence of connected consciousness after
       tracheal intubation: a prospective, international, multicenter
       cohort study of the isolated forearm technique. Anesthesiology 126,
--
       Google Scholar
   11. Gosseries, O., Di, H., Laureys, S. & Boly, M. Measuring
       consciousness in severely damaged brains. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 37,
       457–478 (2014).
       Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar
--
       89–100 https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.26095 (2021).
   14. Gosseries, O., Zasler, N. D. & Laureys, S. Recent advances in
       disorders of consciousness: focus on the diagnosis. Brain Inj. 28,
       1141–1150 (2014).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   15. Stender, J. et al. Diagnostic precision of PET imaging and
       functional MRI in disorders of consciousness: a clinical validation
       study. Lancet 384, 514–522 (2014).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   16. Casali, A. G. et al. A theoretically based index of consciousness
       independent of sensory processing and behavior. Sci. Transl. Med.
       5, 198ra105–198ra105 (2013).
--
       PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   19. Engemann, D. A. et al. Robust EEG-based cross-site and
       cross-protocol classification of states of consciousness. Brain
       141, 3179–3192 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
--
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   23. Liu, Q. et al. Spectrum analysis of EEG signals using CNN to model
       patient’s consciousness level based on anesthesiologists’
       experience. IEEE Access 7, 53731–53742 (2019).
       Article  Google Scholar
--
       Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar
   33. Napolitani, M. et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation combined
       with high-density EEG in altered states of consciousness. Brain
       Inj. 28, 1180–1189 (2014).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
--
       Article  ADS  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar
   35. Rosanova, M. et al. Recovery of cortical effective connectivity and
       recovery of consciousness in vegetative patients. Brain 135,
       1308–1320 (2012).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   36. Sarasso, S. et al. Consciousness and complexity during
       unresponsiveness induced by propofol, xenon, and ketamine. Curr.
       Biol. 25, 3099–3105 (2015).
       Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar
   37. Luppi, A. I. et al. Consciousness-specific dynamic interactions of
       brain integration and functional diversity. Nat. Commun. 10, 4616
       (2019).
--
       Neurosci. 38, 9175–9185 (2018).
       Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   43. Nieminen, J. O. et al. Consciousness and cortical responsiveness: a
       within-state study during non-rapid eye movement sleep. Sci. Rep.
       6, 30932 (2016).
       Article  ADS  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   44. Lee, M. et al. Connectivity differences between consciousness and
       unconsciousness in non-rapid eye movement sleep: a TMS–EEG study.
       Sci. Rep. 9, 5175 (2019).
       Article  ADS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   45. Lee, M. et al. Network properties in transitions of consciousness
       during propofol-induced sedation. Sci. Rep. 7, 16791 (2017).
       Article  ADS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   46. Chennu, S. et al. Brain networks predict metabolism, diagnosis and
       prognosis at the bedside in disorders of consciousness. Brain 140,
       2120–2132 (2017).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   47. Afrasiabi, M. et al. Consciousness depends on integration between
       parietal cortex, striatum, and thalamus. Cell Syst. 12, 363–373
       (2021).
   48. Vanhaudenhuyse, A. et al. Default network connectivity reflects the
       level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
       Brain 133, 161–171 (2010).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   49. Andersen, L. M., Pedersen, M. N., Sandberg, K. & Overgaard, M.
       Occipital MEG activity in the early time range (<300 ms) predicts
       graded changes in perceptual consciousness. Cereb. Cortex 26,
       2677–2688 (2016).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
--
       (EMBC). 3373–3376 (IEEE).
   54. Bodart, O. et al. Measures of metabolism and complexity in the
       brain of patients with disorders of consciousness. Neuroimage Clin.
       14, 354–362 (2017).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   55. Bodart, O. et al. Global structural integrity and effective
       connectivity in patients with disorders of consciousness. Brain
       Stimul. 11, 358–365 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
--
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   66. Thiery, T. et al. Long-range temporal correlations in the brain
       distinguish conscious wakefulness from induced unconsciousness.
       Neuroimage 179, 30–39 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
--
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   70. Nir, Y., Massimini, M., Boly, M. & Tononi, G. Sleep and
       consciousness in Sleep and Consciousness (ed Cavanna, A. E., Nani,
       A., Blumenfeld, H. & Laureys, S.) Chapter 9, 133–182 (Springer
       Berlin Heidelberg, 2013).
   71. Lee, M. et al. Quantifying arousal and awareness in altered states
       of consciousness using interpretable deep learning.
       MinjiLee-ku/ECI: First release of ECI_update.
       https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5760787 (2021).
--
       Seoul, Republic of Korea
       Minji Lee
    2. Coma Science Group, GIGA-Consciousness, GIGA Research Center,
       University of Liège, Liège, Belgium
       Leandro R. D. Sanz, Alice Barra, Audrey Wolff, Olivier
--
       Leandro R. D. Sanz, Alice Barra, Audrey Wolff, Jitka Annen, Aurore
       Thibaut, Rajanikant Panda, Steven Laureys & Olivia Gosseries
    4. Wisconsin Institute for Sleep and Consciousness, Department of
       Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA
       Jaakko O. Nieminen, Melanie Boly, Giulio Tononi & Olivia Gosseries
--
       CHR Citadelle, Liège, Belgium
       Vincent Bonhomme
   12. Anesthesia and Intensive Care Laboratory, GIGA-Consciousness, GIGA
       Research Center, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium
       Vincent Bonhomme
--

   Lee, M., Sanz, L.R.D., Barra, A. et al. Quantifying arousal and
   awareness in altered states of consciousness using interpretable deep
   learning. Nat Commun 13, 1064 (2022).
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28451-0
--
       Brain Informatics (2024)
     * Critical dynamics in spontaneous EEG predict anesthetic-induced
       loss of consciousness and perturbational complexity
          + Charlotte Maschke
          + Jordan O’Byrne
--
       Communications Biology (2024)
     * PerBrain: a multimodal approach to personalized tracking of
       evolving state-of-consciousness in brain-injured patients: protocol
       of an international, multicentric, observational study
          + L. Willacker
