     * Join / Renew

   How SB 1580 Defines ‘Right of Medical Conscience’ and Free Speech in
   Health Care
   By Jeff Scott, Esq., FMA General Counsel | July 20, 2023
--

   It is the intent of the Legislature to provide the right of medical
   conscience for health care providers and payors to ensure they can care
   for patients in a manner consistent with their moral, ethical, and
   religious convictions. Further, it is the intent of the Legislature
   that licensed health care providers and payors be free from threat of
   discrimination for providing conscience-based health care.

   This Legislature coupled this “right of medical conscience” with a
   provision protecting the “use of free speech by a health care
   practitioner” to create a comprehensive legislative package that was a
   priority of Gov. Ron DeSantis. This analysis of SB 1580 will attempt to
   explain how these two new provisions affect the practice of medicine.
   Right of Medical Conscience
   SB 1580 creates a new section of the Florida Statutes^1 that gives
   health care providers (and health care payors) the right to “opt out of
   participation in or payment for any health care service on the basis of
   a conscience-based objection.”
   It is important to note that this right of conscience only applies to a
   “health care service.” It does not give a health care provider the
   right to refuse to perform job requirements that do not involve the
--
   performed or provided by any health care provider.

   If a health care provider has a conscience-based objection to
   performing abortions, the provider may not be discriminated against or
   suffer adverse action for refusing to perform abortions. However, a
--
   for other patients based on the patient’s race, color, religion, sex,
   or national origin.
   The right of conscience is solely attached to a specific health care
   service. A provider can refuse to prescribe contraceptives to his/her
   patients but cannot refuse to prescribe contraceptives to only Medicaid
--
   procedure to his/her patients may not refuse to provide that procedure
   to a subset of patients who engage in a certain type of behavior, even
   if the provider has a conscience-based objection to that behavior.
   While the bill sponsors made it clear as to what the right of
   conscience applies to, they left the issue of whether a conscientious
   objection exists less certain. SB 1580 defines a “conscience-based
   objection” as an objection based on a sincerely held religious, moral,
   or ethical belief.^2 As noted in the footnote, whether an entity such
   as an insurance company has a conscience is determined by existing
   written evidence. If the articles of incorporation for an insurer state
   that the company exists to provide health insurance for individuals
--
   contrary federal requirement). If the company cannot produce a
   governing document, published guideline, or set of policies or
   regulations, it will not be entitled to assert a right of conscience.
   Individual health care providers^3, on the other hand, do not have to
   produce written evidence attesting to a sincerely held religious,
--
   Attorney General, as the entity given enforcement authority for this
   statute, to determine whether a health care provider alleging a
   violation has a valid conscience-based objection. Presumably, the
   Attorney General will assess a provider’s self-professed belief on a
   case-by-case basis in a manner congruent with the inquiry used for
--
   sincerely held religious beliefs).
   Health care providers and payors who wish to opt out of participation
   in or payment for a health care service due to a conscience-based
   objection must do the following:
     * At the time of the objection or as soon as practicable, provide
--
       patient’s medical file.
     * Notify patients seeking an appointment for a health care service
       that the provider has a conscience-based objection to of that
       objection before scheduling the appointment.
     * Providers who are students must provide written notice of their
       conscience-based objection to the educational institution at the
       time the objection is made or as soon as practicable.

   Providers who comply with these requirements may not be discriminated
   against^4 or suffer adverse action^5 for exercising their right of
   medical conscience.
   The right of medical conscience section also includes speech and
   whistle-blower protections, which prohibit discriminating or taking
   adverse action against health care providers or payors who report
   violations of the new right of medical conscience statute. This
   protection is extended to providers who testify, assist or participate
   in a proceeding brought by the Attorney General to determine if a
--
   Interestingly, this part of the new law also includes a prohibition on
   discriminating against a health care provider or payor for reasons not
   related to the right of medical conscience. Protection from
   discrimination is extended to the disclosure of information the
   provider or payor reasonably believes constitutes:
--
   Under the original House companion to SB 1580, health care providers
   and payors were given a civil cause of action for any violation of the
   right of conscience section. SB 1580, however, rejected this approach
   in favor of allowing the Attorney General to investigate complaints and
   bring a civil action for damages, injunctive or other appropriate
   relief, and attorney fees.
   Health care providers and payors who decline to participate in or pay
   for a health care service because of a conscience-based objection may
   not be held civilly liable on that basis alone.
   Finally, acknowledging the existence of federal EMTALA requirements,
   the Legislature specifically stated that the medical conscience section
   does not override any state or federal requirement to provide emergency
   medical treatment.
--
   1184). Despite support from the Governor, the bills never made it to
   the House or Senate floor. The free speech concept, in a different
   form, was combined with the right of conscience issue in SB 1580,
   passed out of both chambers, and was approved by the Governor less than
   a week after the end of session.
--
   ^1 Section 381.00321, Florida Statutes (2023).
   ^2 Health care payors and other entities (such as insurance companies
   and hospitals) can also have conscience-based objections as determined
   by reference to the entities governing documents; published ethical,
   moral, or religious guidelines or directives; mission statements;
