   #Centre for Constitutional Studies » Feed Centre for Constitutional
   Studies » Comments Feed Centre for Constitutional Studies » Freedom of
   Conscience Comments Feed JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

     * The Constitution
--

   Key Terms
   Freedom of conscience (section 2(a)), The Charter

Freedom of Conscience

   July 4, 2019
--
   PrintDownload PDF

   Freedom of conscience is one of the fundamental freedoms protected by
   section 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.[1]

   What is the legal impact of this freedom?

   Ultimately, the freedom of conscience constitutionally recognizes “the
   centrality of individual conscience and the inappropriateness of
   governmental intervention … to constrain its manifestation.”[2] In
   fact, the Supreme Court has ruled that “an emphasis on individual
   conscience and individual judgment … lies at the heart of our
   democratic political tradition. The ability of each citizen to make
   free and informed decisions is the absolute prerequisite for the
--
   What is legally protected from government interference?

   The only Supreme Court case considering the freedom of conscience
   directly is R v Morgentaler.[4] This 1988 case dealt with the
   constitutionality of abortion laws. Justice Wilson stated: “[t]he
   decision whether or not to terminate a pregnancy is essentially a moral
   decision and … the conscience of the individual must be
   paramount.”[5] She also held that the freedoms guaranteed by section
   2(a) “should be broadly construed to extend to conscientiously-held
--

   Without guidance from the Supreme Court, lower courts have had to
   figure out on their own what the freedom of conscience protects. From
   the limited jurisprudence that exists, we know “[t]he guarantee of
   freedom of conscience … is directed at an individual's overarching …
   normative value system.”[7] If a person’s actions are not motivated by
   a “comprehensive value system” (in a secular context),  then they are
   not protected by section 2(a).[8] This can be quite limiting: when
   people have argued that their freedom of conscience was violated by
   mandatory seatbelt laws for example, their arguments failed because
   their objections were not supported by a comprehensive value system.

   ‘Insubstantial’ infringements upon a person’s conscience are also
   outside of the scope of the guarantee.[9] This is a limitation that all
   the fundamental freedoms share: the freedom of religion for instance
--

   One of the few lower court decisions solely considering the freedom of
   conscience, rather than conscience and religion together, was Maurice v
   Canada (Attorney General).[11] Mr. Maurice wanted to receive vegetarian
   meals in prison. Originally, he was provided with these meals in
--
   successfully claimed that, since he remained vegetarian for
   conscientious reasons, this was a violation of his freedom of
   conscience.[12] The Federal Court agreed, declaring that the “Charter …
   entitle[s] the Applicant to a vegetarian diet.”[13]

   The freedom of conscience garnered some attention in 2015 when the
   Supreme Court decided Carter v Canada (Attorney General). In that case,
   a number of interveners claimed that providing access to
   physician-assisted dying would infringe the freedom of conscience of
   medical professionals.[14] This argument went beyond the scope of what
   needed to be decided in that case. However the Court noted that
   physician-assisted dying was indeed a “matter of conscience” and that
   at some point “the Charter rights of patients and physicians will need
   to be reconciled.”[15]

   What are the limitations on the freedom of conscience?

   While the freedom of conscience is a fundamental freedom, it is not
   absolute. As with all other rights and freedoms in the Charter, if a
   breach of this freedom is found by a court, the government can argue
--

   [14] 2015 SCC 5 (Factum of the Interveners Catholic Civil Rights
   League, Faith and Freedom Alliance and Protection of Conscience Project
   at para 33); See also 2015 SCC 5 (Factum of the Intervener the Canadian
   Medical Association) (The Canadian Medical Association did not refer to
   section 2(a) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, but did state the
   importance of physicians being able to follow their conscience.

   [15] Ibid at para 132.
