Georg Lukacs History & Class Consciousness 1920

Class Consciousness

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Written: 1920;
Source: History & Class Consciousness;
Translator: Rodney Livingstone;
Publisher: Merlin Press, 1967;
---------------
the division of society into classes is determined by position within
the process of production. But what, then, is the meaning of class
consciousness? The question at once branches out into a series of
closely interrelated problems. First of all, how are we to understand
class consciousness (in theory)? Second, what is the (practical)
function of class consciousness, so understood, in the context of the
class struggle? This leads to the further question: is the problem of
class consciousness a ‘general’ sociological problem or does it mean one
thing for the proletariat and another for every other class to have
emerged hitherto? And lastly, is class consciousness homogeneous in
nature and function or can we discern different gradations and levels in
it? And if so, what are their practical implications for the class
---------------
scientific Marxism consists, then, in the realisation that the real
motor forces of history are independent of man’s (psychological)
consciousness of them.

At a more primitive stage of knowledge this independence takes the form
---------------
political theory of classical German philosophy and in the economic
theory of Adam Smith and Ricardo. Marx opposes to them a critical
philosophy, a theory of theory and a consciousness of consciousness.
This critical philosophy implies above all historical criticism. It
dissolves the rigid, unhistorical, natural appearance of social
---------------

It might look as though by dissolving the dilemma in this manner we were
denying consciousness any decisive role in the process of history. It is
true that the conscious reflexes of the different stages of economic
growth remain historical facts of great importance; it is true that
---------------
does not deny that men perform their historical deeds themselves and
that they do so consciously. But as Engels emphasises in a letter to
Mehring, ^([9]) this consciousness is false. However, the dialectical
method does not permit us simply to proclaim the ‘falseness’ of this
consciousness and to persist in an inflexible confrontation of true and
false. On the contrary, it requires us to investigate this ‘false
consciousness’ concretely as an aspect of the historical totality and as
a stage in the historical process.

---------------
(’individual’ here can refer to an individual man, class or people) and
in his empirically given (and hence psychological or mass-psychological)
consciousness. And just when they imagine that they have discovered the
most concrete thing of all: society as a concrete totality, the system
of production at a given point in history and the resulting division of
---------------

Concrete analysis means then: the relation to society as a whole. For
only when this relation is established does the consciousness of their
existence that men have at any given time emerge in all its essential
characteristics. It appears, on the one hand, as something which is
---------------
same time, objectively, it by-passes the essence of the evolution of
society and fails to pinpoint it and express it adequately. That is to
say, objectively, it appears as a ‘false consciousness’. On the other
hand, we may see the same consciousness as something which fails
subjectively to reach its self-appointed goals, while furthering and
realising the objective aims of society of which it is ignorant and
which it did not choose.

This twofold dialectical determination of ‘false consciousness’
constitutes an analysis far removed from the naive description of what
men in fact thought, felt and wanted at any moment in history and from
---------------
genuine historical analysis. The relation with concrete totality and the
dialectical determinants arising from it transcend pure description and
yield the category of objective possibility. By relating consciousness
to the whole of society it becomes possible to infer the thoughts and
feelings which men would have in a particular situation if they were
---------------
distinguished basic types whose characteristics are determined by the
types of position available in the process of production. Now class
consciousness consists in fact of the appropriate and rational reactions
‘imputed’ [zugerechnet] to a particular typical position in the process
of production.^([11]) This consciousness is, therefore, neither the sum
nor the average of what is thought or felt by the single individuals who
make up the class. And yet the historically significant actions of the
class as a whole are determined in the last resort by this consciousness
and not by the thought of the individual – and these actions can be
understood only by reference to this consciousness.

This analysis establishes right from the start the distance that
separates class consciousness from the empirically given, and from the
psychologically describable and explicable ideas which men form about
their situation in life. But it is not enough just to state that this
---------------
produce qualitative distinctions. And we must discover, secondly, the
practical significance of these different possible relations between the
objective economic totality, the imputed class consciousness and the
real, psychological thoughts of men about their lives. We must discover,
in short, the practical, historical function of class consciousness.

Only after such preparatory formulations can we begin to exploit the
---------------
for them by the economic structure of society and establishing their
position in it. ^([12]) Regarded abstractly and formally, then, class
consciousness implies a class-conditioned unconsciousness of ones own
socio-historical and economic condition. ^([13]) This condition is given
as a definite structural relation, a definite formal nexus which appears
---------------

For a class to be ripe for hegemony means that its interests and
consciousness enable it to organise the whole of society in accordance
with those interests. The crucial question in every class struggle is
this: which class possesses this capacity and this consciousness at the
decisive moment ? This does not preclude the use of force. It does not
mean that the class-interests destined to prevail and thus to uphold the
---------------
about by the most ruthless use of force (as e.g. the primitive
accumulation of capital). But it often turns out that questions of class
consciousness prove to be decisive in just those situations where force
is unavoidable and where classes are locked in a
life-and-death-struggle. Thus the noted Hungarian Marxist Erwin Szabo is
---------------
the peasants’ revolt was suppressed only by the ruthless use of force
and that its defeat was not grounded in socioeconomic factors and in the
class consciousness of the peasants. He overlooks the fact that the
deepest reason for the weakness of the peasantry and the superior
strength of the princes is to be sought in class consciousness. Even the
most cursory student of the military aspects of the Peasants’ War can
easily convince himself of this.

It must not be thought, however, that all classes ripe for hegemony have
a class consciousness with the same inner structure. Everything hinges
on the extent to which they can become conscious of the actions they
need to perform in order to obtain and organise power. The question then
becomes: how far does the class concerned perform the actions history
has imposed on it ‘consciously’ or ‘unconsciously’? And is that
consciousness ‘true’ or ‘false’. These distinctions are by no means
academic. Quite apart from problems of culture where such fissures and
dissonances are crucial, in all practical matters too the fate of a
class depends on its ability to elucidate and solve the problems with
which history confronts it. And here it becomes transparently obvious
that class consciousness is concerned neither with the thoughts of
individuals, however advanced, nor with the state of scientific
knowledge. For example, it is quite clear that ancient society was
---------------
a class standpoint other than that of the bourgeoisie. And no class can
do that – unless it is willing to abdicate its power freely. Thus the
barrier which converts the class consciousness of the bourgeoisie into
‘false’ consciousness is objective; it is the class situation itself. It
is the objective result of the economic set-up, and is neither
arbitrary, subjective nor psychological. The class consciousness of the
bourgeoisie may well be able to reflect all the problems of organisation
entailed by its hegemony and by the capitalist transformation and
---------------
feudalism or even the mercantilism of the transitional period, but by an
internal dialectical twist they became “natural laws based on the
unconsciousness of those who are involved in them”. ^([15])

It would be beyond the scope of these pages to advance further and
attempt to construct a historical and systematic typology of the
possible degrees of class consciousness. That would require – in the
first instance – an exact study of the point in the total process of
production at which the interests of the various classes are most
---------------
totality that is then achieved? How far does it really embrace the true
totality of production? It is quite evident that the quality and
structure of class consciousness must be very different if, e.g. it
remains stationary at the separation of consumption from production (as
with the Roman Lumpenproletariat) or if it represents the formation of
---------------
cannot embark on a systematic typology of the various points of view it
can be seen from the foregoing that these specimens of ‘false’
consciousness differ from each other both qualitatively, structurally
and in a manner that is crucial for the activity of the classes in
society.
---------------
It follows from the above that for pre-capitalist epochs and for the
behaviour of many strata within capitalism whose economic roots lie in
pre-capitalism, class consciousness is unable to achieve complete
clarity and to influence the course of history consciously.

---------------
only question that arises is whether this unity enables the individual
sectors of society to relate to society as a whole in such a way that
their imputed consciousness can assume an economic form. Marx emphasises
^([19]) that in Greece and Rome the class struggle “chiefly took the
form of a conflict between debtors and creditors”. But he also makes the
---------------
despite this conflict between juridical form and economic content, the
juridical (privilege-creating) forms retain a great and often absolutely
crucial importance for the consciousness of estates in the process of
disintegration. For the form of the estates conceals the connection
between the – real but ‘unconscious’ – economic existence of the estate
and the economic totality of society. It fixates consciousness directly
on its privileges (as in the case of the knights during the Reformation)
or else – no less directly – on the particular element of society from
---------------
absorbed economically into a number of different classes, it still
retains this (objectively unreal) ideological coherence. For the
relation to the whole created by the consciousness of one’s status is
not directed to the real, living economic unity but to a past state of
society as constituted by the privileges accorded to the estates. Status
– consciousness – a real historical factor masks class consciousness; in
fact it prevents it from emerging at all. A like phenomenon can be
observed under capitalism in the case of all ‘privileged’ groups whose
---------------
control (as was the case with the great landowners).

Thus class consciousness has quite a different relation to history in
pre-capitalist and capitalist periods. In the former case the classes
could only be deduced from the immediately given historical reality by
---------------
its starkness as the motor of history. In pre-capitalist periods man
could never become conscious (not even by virtue of an ‘imputed’
consciousness) of the “true driving forces which stand behind the
motives of human actions in history”. They remained hidden behind
motives and were in truth the blind forces of history. Ideological
---------------

But there is still an unbridgeable gulf between this and capitalism
where economic factors are not concealed ‘behind’ consciousness but are
present in consciousness itself (albeit unconsciously or repressed).
With capitalism, with the abolition of the feudal estates and with the
creation of a society with a purely economic articulation, class
consciousness arrived at the point where it could become conscious. From
then on social conflict was reflected in an ideological struggle for
consciousness and for the veiling or the exposure of the class character
of society. But the fact that this conflict became possible points
forward to the dialectical contradictions and the internal dissolution
---------------
of society rather than on the construction of society as a whole.

The question of consciousness may make its appearance in terms of the
objectives chosen or in terms of action, as for instance in the case of
the petty bourgeoisie. This class lives at least in part in the
---------------
it into harmony”. ^([25]) In all decisions crucial for society its
actions will be irrelevant and it will be forced to fight for both sides
in turn but always without consciousness. In so doing its own objectives
– which exist exclusively in its own consciousness – must become
progressively weakened and increasingly divorced from social action.
Ultimately they will assume purely ‘ideological’ forms The petty
---------------
of 1789 or the Russian Revolution of 1917), or reactionary (as with
Napoleon’s coup d’état) will depend on the position of the other classes
involved in the conflict, and on the level of consciousness of the
parties that lead them. For this reason, too, the ideological form taken
by the class consciousness of the peasants changes its content more
frequently than that of other classes: this is because it is always
borrowed from elsewhere.

Hence parties that base themselves wholly or in part on this class
consciousness always lack really firm and secure support in critical
situations (as was true of the Socialist Revolutionaries in 1917 and
1918). This explains why it is possible for peasant conflicts to be
fought out under opposing flags. Thus it is highly characteristic of
both Anarchism and the ‘class consciousness of the peasantry that a
number of counter-revolutionary rebellions and uprisings of the middle
and upper strata of the peasantry in Russia should have found the
anarchist view of society to be a satisfying ideology. We cannot really
speak of class consciousness in the case of these classes (if, indeed,
we can, even speak of them as classes in the strict Marxist sense of the
term): for a full consciousness of their situation would reveal to them
the hopelessness of their particularise strivings in the face of the
inevitable course of events. Consciousness and self-interest then are
mutually incompatible in this instance. And as class consciousness was
defined in terms of the problems of imputing class interests the failure
of their class consciousness to develop in the immediately given
historical reality becomes comprehensible philosophically.

With the bourgeoisie, also, class consciousness stands in opposition to
class interest. But here the antagonism is not contradictory but
dialectical.
---------------
The distinction between the two modes of contradiction may be briefly
described in this way: in the case of the other classes, a class
consciousness is prevented from emerging by their position within the
process of production and the interests this generates. In the case of
the bourgeoisie, however, these factors combine to produce a class
consciousness but one which is cursed by its very nature with the tragic
fate of developing an insoluble contradiction at the very zenith of its
powers. As a result of this contradiction it must annihilate itself.
---------------
into a new repressiveness. Sociologically, the bourgeoisie did
everything in its power to eradicate the fact of class conflict from the
consciousness of society, even though class conflict had only emerged in
its purity and became established as an historical fact with the advent
of capitalism. Ideologically, we see the same contradiction in the fact
---------------
All these contradictions, and the list might be extended indefinitely,
are only the reflection of the deepest contradictions in capitalism
itself as they appear in the consciousness of the bourgeoisie in
accordance with their position in the total system of production. For
this reason they appear as dialectical contradictions in the class
consciousness of the bourgeoisie. They do not merely reflect the
inability of the bourgeoisie to grasp the contradictions inherent in its
own social order. For, on the one hand, capitalism is the first system
---------------
^([27]) and this implies that in theory the bourgeoisie should be able
to progress from this central point to the possession of an (imputed)
class consciousness of the whole system of production. On the other
hand, the position held by the capitalist class and the interests which
determine its actions ensure that it will be unable to control its own
---------------
There are many reasons for this. In the first place, it only seems to be
true that for capitalism production occupies the centre of class
consciousness and hence provides the theoretical starting-point for
analysis. With reference to Ricardo “who had been reproached with an
exclusive concern with production”, Marx emphasised ^([28]) that he
---------------
production through cartels and trusts only shifts the contradiction
elsewhere, without, however, eliminating it. This situation forms one of
the decisive factors governing the class consciousness of the
bourgeoisie. It is true that the bourgeoisie acts as a class in the
objective evolution of society. But it understands the process (which it
---------------
bafflement felt by the individual capitalist when confronted by his own
individual fate. The facts and the situations which induce this panic
force something into the consciousness of the bourgeoisie which is too
much of a brute fact for its existence to be wholly denied or repressed.
But equally it is something that the bourgeoisie can never fully
---------------

In this way the objective limits of capitalist production become the
limits of the class consciousness of the bourgeoisie. The older
‘natural’ and ‘conservative’ forms of domination had left unmolested
^([34]) the forms of production of whole sections of the people they
---------------
ignorance of the objective economic limitations of its own system
expresses itself as an internal, dialectical contradiction in its class
consciousness

This means that formally the class consciousness of the bourgeoisie is
geared to economic consciousness. And indeed the highest degree of
unconsciousness, the crassest, form of ‘false consciousness’ always
manifests itself when the conscious mastery of economic phenomena
appears to be at its greatest. From the point of view of the relation of
consciousness to society this contradiction is expressed as the
irreconcilable antagonism between ideology and economic base. Its
dialectics are grounded in the irreconcilable antagonism between the
(capitalist) individual, i.e. the stereotyped individual of capitalism,
and the ‘natural’ and inevitable process of development, i.e. the
process not subject to consciousness. In consequence theory and practice
are brought into irreconcilable opposition to each other. But the
resulting dualism is anything but stable; in fact it constantly strives
---------------
disruption.

This internal dialectical contradiction in the class consciousness of
the bourgeoisie is further aggravated by the fact that the objective
limits of capitalism do not remain purely negative. That is to say that
capitalism does not merely set ‘natural’ laws in motion that provoke
crises which it cannot comprehend. On the contrary, those limits acquire
a historical embodiment with its own consciousness and its own actions:
the proletariat.

---------------
capitalism, the bourgeoisie was thrown back increasingly on to a
conscious defensive. The dialectical contradiction in the ‘false’
consciousness of the bourgeoisie became more and more acute: the ‘false’
consciousness was converted into a mendacious consciousness. What had
been at first an objective contradiction now became subjective also: the
theoretical problem turned into a moral posture which decisively
---------------

Thus the situation in which the bourgeoisie finds itself determines the
function of its class consciousness in its struggle to achieve control
of society. The hegemony of the bourgeoisie really does embrace the
whole of society; it really does attempt to organise the whole of
---------------
the rule of a minority. Its hegemony is exercised not merely by a
minority but in the interest of that minority, so the need to deceive
the other classes and to ensure that their class consciousness remains
amorphous is inescapable for a bourgeois regime. (Consider here the
theory of the state that stands ‘above’ class antagonisms, or the notion
---------------
‘essence’ of history and the state. But in vain: with the end of the
century the issue was resolved by the advances of science and their
corresponding effects on the consciousness of the capitalist elite.

This can be seen very clearly in the bourgeoisie’s greater readiness to
---------------
with current attempts to harmonise a ‘planned’ economy with the class
interests of the bourgeoisie, we are forced to admit that what we are
witnessing is the capitulation of the class consciousness of the
bourgeoisie before that of the proletariat. Of course the section of the
bourgeoisie that accepts the notion of a ‘planned’ economy does not mean
---------------
4

In this struggle for consciousness historical materialism plays a
crucial role. Ideologically no less than economically, the bourgeoisie
and the proletariat are mutually interdependent. The same process that
---------------
of society a power-factor of the first, and perhaps decisive importance.

The unique function of consciousness in the class struggle of the
proletariat has consistently been overlooked by the vulgar Marxists who
have substituted a petty ‘Realpolitik’ for the great battle of principle
---------------
social change. When the vulgar Marxists detach themselves from this
central point of view, i.e. from the point where a proletarian class
consciousness arises, they thereby place themselves on the level of
consciousness of the bourgeoisie. And that the bourgeoisie fighting on
its own ground will prove superior to the proletariat both economically
and ideologically can come as a surprise only to a vulgar Marxist.
---------------
its ability to see society from the centre as a coherent whole. This
means that it is able to act in such a way as to change reality; in the
class consciousness of the proletariat theory and practice coincide and
so it can consciously throw the weight of its actions onto the scales of
history – and this is the deciding factor. When the vulgar Marxists
---------------
various elements of the process they had hoped to master.

The class consciousness that springs from this position must exhibit the
same internal structure as that of the bourgeoisie. But when the logic
of events drives the same dialectical contradictions to the surface of
consciousness the consequences for the proletariat are even more
disastrous than for the bourgeoisie. For despite all the dialectical
contradictions, despite all its objective falseness, the self-deceiving
‘false’ consciousness that we find in the bourgeoisie is at least in
accord with its class situation. It cannot save the bourgeoisie from the
constant exacerbation of these contradictions and so from destruction,
---------------
victories, albeit of short duration.

But in the case of the proletariat such a consciousness not only has to
overcome these internal (bourgeois) contradictions, but it also
conflicts with the course of action to which the economic situation
---------------
comes to it 1 s goal the more urgent it becomes for the proletariat to
understand its own historical mission and the more vigorously and
directly proletarian class consciousness will determine each of its
actions. For the blind power of the forces at work will only advance
‘automatically’ to their goal of self-annihilation as long as that goal
---------------
capitalism develops, the fate of the revolution (and with it the fate of
mankind) will depend on the ideological maturity of the proletariat,
i.e. on its class consciousness.

We have now determined the unique function of the class consciousness of
the proletariat in contrast to that of other classes. The proletariat
cannot liberate itself as a class without simultaneously abolishing
class society as such. For that reason its consciousness, the last class
consciousness in the history of mankind, must both lay bare the nature
of society and achieve an increasingly inward fusion of theory and
practice. ‘Ideology’ for the proletariat is no banner to follow into
---------------
the level of mere ‘ideology’ and forces the proletariat to use bourgeois
(or petty bourgeois) tactics. It thereby robs it of its greatest
strength by forcing class consciousness into the secondary or inhibiting
role of a bourgeois consciousness, instead of the active role of a
proletarian consciousness.

The relationship between class consciousness and class situation is
really very simple in the case of the proletariat, but the obstacles
which prevent its consciousness being realised in practice are
correspondingly greater. In the first place this consciousness is
divided within itself. It is true that society as such is highly unified
and that it evolves in a unified manner. But in a world where the
---------------
environment it looks as if there is not a unity but a diversity of
mutually independent objects and forces. The most striking division in
proletarian class consciousness and the one most fraught with
consequences is the separation of the economic struggle from the
political one. Marx repeatedly exposed ^([37]) the fallacy of this split
---------------
Classes that successfully carried out revolutions in earlier societies
had their task made easier subjective by this very fact of the
discrepancy between their own class consciousness and the objective
economic set-up, i.e. by their very unawareness of their own function in
the process of change. They had only to use the power at their disposal
---------------

But as the proletariat has been entrusted by history with the task of
transforming social consciously, its class consciousness must develop a
dialectical contradiction between its immediate interests and its
long-term objectives, and between the discrete factors and the whole.
---------------
consciously beyond the confines of capitalist society.

This means that subjectively, i.e. for the class consciousness of the
proletariat, the dialectical relationship between immediate interests
and objective impact on the whole of society is loc in the consciousness
of the proletariat itself. It does not work itself out as a purely
objective process quite apart from all (imputed) consciousness – as was
the case with all classes hitherto. Thus the revolutionary victory of
the proletariat does not imply, as with former classes, the immediate
---------------

This inner dialectic makes it hard for the proletariat to develop its
class consciousness in opposition to that of the bourgeoisie which by
cultivating the crudest and most abstract kind of empiricism was able to
make do with a superficial view of the world. Whereas even when the
---------------
early as his observations on the Weavers’ Uprising in Silesia.) ^([38])
For because of its situation this contradiction is introduced directly
into the consciousness of the proletariat, whereas the bourgeoisie, from
its situation, saw the contradictions confronting it as the outer limits
of its consciousness.

Conversely, this contradiction means that ‘false’ consciousness is
something very different for the proletariat than for every preceding
class. Even correct statements about particular situations or aspects of
the development of bourgeois class consciousness reveal, when related to
the whole of society, the limits of that consciousness and unmask its
‘falseness’. Whereas the proletariat always aspires towards the truth
even in its ‘false’ consciousness and in its substantive errors. It is
sufficient here to recall the social criticism of the Utopians or the
proletarian and revolutionary extension of Ricardo’s theory. Concerning
---------------

Only with the aid of this distinction can there be any resolution of the
contradiction in the class consciousness of the proletariat; only with
its aid can that contradiction become a conscious f actor in history.
For the objective aspiration towards truth which is immanent even in the
‘false’ consciousness of the proletariat does not at all imply that this
aspiration can come to light without the active intervention of the
proletariat. On the contrary, the mere aspiration towards truth can only
strip off the veils of falseness and mature into historically
significant and socially revolutionary knowledge by the potentiating of
consciousness, by conscious action and conscious self-criticism. Such
knowledge would of course be unattainable were it not for the objective
aspiration, and here we find confirmation of Marx’s dictum that mankind
---------------
the fruit of the conscious deeds of the proletariat.

The dialectical cleavage in the consciousness of the proletariat is a
product of the same structure that makes the historical mission of the
proletariat possible by pointing forward and beyond the existing social
---------------
the class’s self-interest and that of society, between individual deed
and social consequences. This antagonism set an external limit to
consciousness. Here, in the centre of proletarian class consciousness we
discover an antagonism between momentary interest and ultimate goal. The
outward victory of the proletariat can only be achieved if this
---------------

As we stressed in the motto to this essay the existence of this conflict
enables us to perceive that class consciousness is identical with
neither the psychological consciousness of individual members of the
proletariat, nor with the (mass-psychological) consciousness of the
proletariat as a whole; but it is, on the contrary, the sense, become
conscious, of the historical role of the class. This sense will
---------------
may have either of two functions: either it will be a step towards the
ultimate goal or else it will conceal it. Which of the two it will be
depends entirely upon the class consciousness of the proletariat and not
on victory or defeat in isolated skirmishes. Marx drew attention very
early on ^([41]) to this danger, which is particularly acute on the
---------------
struggle to achieve it as a means of education for the final battle
whose outcome depends on closing the gap between the psychological
consciousness and the imputed one. Instead it regards the particular as
a valuable achievement in itself or at least as a step along the path
towards the ultimate goal. In a word, opportunism mistakes the actual,
psychological state 0 consciousness of proletarians for the class
consciousness of the proletariat.

The practical damage resulting from this confusion can be seen in the
great loss of unity and cohesiveness in proletarian praxis when compared
to the unity of the objective economic tendencies. The superior strength
of true, practical class consciousness lies in the ability to look
beyond the divisive symptoms of the economic process to the unity of the
total social system underlying it. In the age of capitalism it is not
---------------
branch of industry, in the form of ‘economic’ or ‘political’ crisis,
etc.), and even if in consequence the reflex of the crisis is fragmented
in the immediate psychological consciousness of the workers, it is still
possible and necessary to advance beyond this consciousness. And this is
instinctively felt to be a necessity by larger and larger sections of
the proletariat.
---------------
tendency until the crisis became acute. Now, however, it adopts a course
directly opposed to it. Its aim now is to scotch the development of
proletarian class consciousness in its progress from that which is
merely given to that which conforms to the objective total process; even
more, it hopes to reduce the class consciousness of the proletariat to
the level of the psychologically given and thus to divert into the
opposite direction what had hitherto been the purely instinctive
tendency. As long as the unification of proletarian class consciousness
was not a practical possibility this theory could – with some charity –
be regarded as a mere error. But in this situation it takes on the
---------------
right instincts of the proletariat it plays the same role as that played
hitherto by Capitalist theory: it denounces the correct view of the
overall economic situation and the correct class consciousness of the
proletariat together with its organised form, the Communist Party, as
something unreal and inimical to the ‘true’ interests of the workers
(i.e. their immediate, national or professional interests) and as
something alien to their ‘genuine’ class consciousness (i.e. that which
is psychologically given).

To say that class consciousness has no psychological reality does not
imply that it is a mere fiction. Its reality is vouched for by its
ability to explain the infinitely painful path of the proletarian
---------------
the celebrated passage in The Eighteenth Brumaire.

Only the consciousness of the proletariat can point to the way that
leads out of the impasse of capitalism. As long as this consciousness is
lacking, the crisis remains permanent, it goes back to its
starting-point, repeats the cycle until after infinite sufferings and
---------------
is to say, the class struggle must be raised from the level of economic
necessity to the level of conscious aim and effective class
consciousness. The pacifists and humanitarians of the class struggle
whose efforts tend whether they will or no to retard this lengthy,
painful and crisis-ridden process would be horrified if they could but
---------------
The only question at issue is how much it has to suffer before it
achieves ideological maturity, before it acquires a true understanding
of its class situation and a true class consciousness.

Of course this uncertainty and lack of clarity are themselves the
---------------
criticism and the negation of this form of life. But until the objective
crisis of capitalism has matured and until the proletariat has achieved
true class consciousness, and the ability to understand the crisis
fully, it cannot go beyond the criticism of reification and so it is
only negatively superior to its antagonist. Indeed, if it can do no more
---------------
unionists. Such criticism from the standpoint of capitalism can be seen
most strikingly in the separation of the various theatres of war. The
bare fact of separation itself indicates that the consciousness of the
proletariat is still fettered by reification. And if the proletariat
finds the economic inhumanity to which it is subjected easier to
---------------
unconquered power of capitalist forms of life in the proletariat itself.

The reified consciousness must also remain hopelessly trapped in the two
extremes of crude empiricism and abstract utopianism. In the one case,
consciousness becomes either a completely passive observer moving in
obedience to laws which it can never control. In the other it regards
itself as a power which is able of its own – subjective – volition to
master the essentially meaningless motion of objects. We have already
identified the crude empiricism of the opportunists in its relation to
proletarian class consciousness. We must now go on to see utopianism as
characteristic of the internal divisions within class consciousness.
(The separation of empiricism from utopianism undertaken here for purely
methodological reasons should not be taken as an admission that the two
---------------

The philosophical efforts of the young Marx were largely directed
towards the refutation of the various false theories of consciousness
(including both the ‘idealism’ of the Hegelian School and the
‘materialism’ of Feuerbach) and towards the discovery of a correct view
of the role of consciousness in history. As early as the Correspondence
of 1843 [with Ruge] he conceives of consciousness as immanent in
history. Consciousness does not lie outside the real process of history.
It does not have to be introduced into the world by philosophers;
therefore to gaze down arrogantly upon the petty struggles of the world
and to despise them is indefensible. “We only show it [the world] what
its struggles are about and consciousness is a thing that it must needs
acquire whether it will or not.” What is needed then is only “to explain
its own actions to it”. ^([44]) The great polemic against Hegel in The
Holy Family concentrates mainly on this point. ^([45]), Hegel’s
inadequacy is that he only seems to allow the absolute spirit to make
history. The resulting otherworldliness of consciousness vis-à-vis the
real events of history becomes, in the hands of Hegel’s disciples, an
arrogant – and reactionary confrontation of ‘spirit’ and ‘mass’. Marx
---------------

Complementing this is his – aphoristic – critique of Feuerbach. The
materialists had elaborated a view of consciousness as of something
appertaining to this world. Marx sees it as merely one stage in the
process, the stage of ‘bourgeois society’. He opposes to it the notion
of consciousness as ‘practical critical activity’ with the task of
‘changing the world’.

This provides us with the philosophical foundation we need to settle
accounts with the utopians. For their thought contains this very duality
of social process and the consciousness of it. Consciousness approaches
society from another world and leads it from. the false path it has
followed back to the right one. The utopians are prevented by the
---------------
bearer of historical movement in history itself, in the way the
proletariat organises itself as a class and, hence, in the class
consciousness of the proletariat. They are not yet able to “take note of
what is happening before their very eyes and to become its mouthpiece”.
^([46])
---------------
means that utopianism can be dismissed as a factor in the proletariat’s
struggle for freedom. This is true only for those stages of class
consciousness that have really achieved the unity of theory and practice
described by Marx, the real and practical intervention of class
consciousness in the course of history and hence the practical
understanding of reification. And this did not all happen at a single
stroke and in a coherent manner. For there are not merely national and
‘social’ stages involved but there are also gradations within the class
consciousness of workers in the same strata. The separation of economics
from politics is the most revealing and also the most important instance
of this. It appears that some sections of the proletariat have quite the
right instincts as far as the economic struggle goes and can even raise
them to the level of class consciousness. At the same time, ‘however,
when it comes to political questions they manage to persist in a
completely utopian point of view. It does not need to be emphasised that
---------------
not yet possible to see society ;is a whole. This can be seen at its
clearest in purely ideological questions, in questions of culture. These
questions occupy an almost wholly isolated position in the consciousness
of the proletariat; the organic bonds connecting these issues with the
immediate life-interests of the proletariat as well as with society as a
whole have not even begun to penetrate its consciousness. The
achievement in this area hardly ever goes beyond the self-criticism of
capitalism – carried out here by the proletariat. What is positive here
---------------

These gradations are, then, on the one hand, objective historical
necessities, nuances in the objective possibilities of consciousness
(such as the relative cohesiveness of politics and economics in
comparison to cultural questions). On the other hand, where
consciousness already exists as an objective possibility, they indicate
degrees of distance between the psychological class consciousness and
the adequate understanding of the total situation. These gradations,
however, can no longer be referred back to socioeconomic causes. The
objective theory of class consciousness is the theory of its objective
possibility. The stratification of the problems and economic interests
within the proletariat is, unfortunately, almost wholly unexplored, but
---------------
various strata, we would still be confronted at every turn with the
problem of whether it is actually possible to make the objective
possibility of class consciousness into a reality. Hitherto this
question could only occur to extraordinary individuals (consider Marx’s
completely non-utopian prescience with regard to the problems of
---------------
in an increasingly radical and conscious manner. When this weapon
increases in power to the point where it becomes the organ of state,
this is a sign that the class consciousness of the proletariat is on the
verge of overcoming the bourgeois outlook of its leaders.

The revolutionary workers’ council (not to be confused with its
opportunist caricatures) is one of the forms which the consciousness of
the proletariat has striven to create ever since its inception. The fact
that it exists and is constantly developing shows that the proletariat
already stands on the threshold of its own consciousness and hence on
the threshold of victory. The workers’ council spells the political and
economic defeat of reification. In the period following the dictatorship
---------------

Thus we must never overlook the distance that separates the
consciousness of even the most revolutionary worker from the authentic
class consciousness of the proletariat. But even this situation can be
explained on the basis of the Marxist theory of class struggle and class
consciousness. The proletariat only perfects itself by annihilating and
transcending itself, by creating the classless society through the
successful conclusion of its own class struggle. The struggle for this
---------------
It is equally the struggle of the proletariat against itself. against
the devastating and degrading effects of the capitalist system upon its
class consciousness. The proletariat will only have won the real victory
when it has overcome these effects within itself. The separation of the
areas that should be united, the diverse stages of consciousness which
the proletariat has reached in the various spheres of activity are a
precise index of what has been achieved and what remains to be done. The
---------------
economic self-contradiction of any purely capitalist society is
undoubtedly one of the reasons for the contradictions in the class
consciousness of the bourgeoisie.

28. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, p. 285.
