    2. Essays by Theme
    3. Moral Philosophy
    4. Conscience and Moral Rules in Adam Smith

Conscience and Moral Rules in Adam Smith

   sympathy impartial spectator duty self-deceit moral sentiments
--
   Introduction
   In this essay I explore Adam Smith’s analysis of the origins of
   conscience and general moral rules in The Theory of Moral Sentiments. I
   argue that Adam Smith offers a distinction between moral conscience and
   general moral rules that sidesteps the traditional distinction between
   universal and relative moral standards, leading to a fundamental
   rethinking of the problem of the variability of moral opinion and the
   demands of moral conscience and duty.
   Moral Conscience
   Like the thought of his mentor Francis Hutcheson and of his friend
   David Hume, Smith’s moral theory is rooted in an analysis of the
--
   with the adoption of an impartial spectator position to correct for any
   bias in our judgments.
   Smith’s notion of moral conscience follows directly from this general
   approach. He believes we cultivate a moral conscience by learning to
   view ourselves, our intentions and our actions from a position of
   impartial spectatorship. From this position, we cultivate a concern
   with praiseworthiness and blameworthiness, not praise and blame. Being
   virtuous and having a fully developed moral conscience for Smith
   represents the highest stage in the moral development of an individual.
   General Rules and Duty
--
   general rules concerning what is fit and proper either to be done or to
   be avoided” (TMS: 159). The specific mechanism by which these rules are
   formed is considerably different from the cultivation of conscience.
   Take the emergence of negative rules or commands that order us not to
   do something. We observe another’s behavior and disapprove of it. We
--
   rules are formed out of our judgments of particular experiences that we
   observe in conjunction with the judgments of others. A desire for
   praise or an aversion to blame, not the moral conscience’s concern for
   praiseworthiness or aversion to blameworthiness, compels us to develop
   them. After these general rules are formed and “universally
--
   standards that have emerged in the society in which we live. Finally,
   this view explains how tensions arise when the judgments of our moral
   conscience might be displaced or, at least, come into conflict with the
   general rules that are established in a particular society and to which
   we feel deep sentimental attachments. In Smith’s world, there is no
   guarantee that the conclusions of our sense of moral conscience will
   dovetail neatly into our sense of duty.
   The Sense of Duty
   Smith’s conclusions about the difference between the dictates of moral
   conscience and our sense of duty to obey general rules are profound.
   Virtuous individuals guided by moral conscience cultivate the feelings
   that are appropriate to particular situations. For example, when
   confronted with the benevolent behavior of another, they feel gratitude
--
   sentiments for virtue. “Without this sacred regard to general rules,
   there is no man whose conduct can be much depended upon” (TMS: 163).
   The Tension between Conscience and Duty
   For Smith, humans are subject to multiple commands in ethics, some
   stemming from the dictates of conscience and others from duty. When
   should the principle of duty be the sole principle regulating our
   conduct in the world, and when should it concur with other motives such
   as those provided by moral conscience? Conscience and duty introduce
   tension into Smith’s understanding of moral judgement and action in The
   Theory of Moral Sentiments. Understanding that tension between the
   demands of conscience and duty lies at the heart of the final chapter
   of Part VI.
   Some moral judgements are guided primarily by moral conscience; others
   are guided by general rules and our sense of duty. Given the
   characteristics of a particular passion, individuals may face a
   difficult task of balancing between the demands of conscience and of
   duty. For example, regarding benevolent and social sentiments like
   love, our moral judgements and actions flow naturally from our
--
   reelection, or a tradesman seeking a special job, must be grounded, at
   least in part, by the passion of ambition, and not just duty or
   conscience, for successful advancement and social recognition.
   A second issue that follows from the distinction between conscience and
   duty involves the precision and exactness of the general moral rules
   themselves. Some rules are clearer and more important to society than
--
   The Theory of Moral Sentiments and remains prone to misinterpretation.
   One might easily argue that what Smith means to say is that the
   conclusions of conscience are the general laws of morality backed by
   our religious sentiment. From this interpretation, conscience can
   easily be identified as “vicegerents of God” that reward us for
   following the law and punish us for breaking it. If my reading of the
   sharp distinction between duty and conscience is correct, this reading
   is seriously mistaken. As I argue above, our general rules of morality
   are generalizations based upon our observations of our moral judgments
   in conjunction with those of others. They are not conclusions of our
   moral conscience. Conscience deals with the problem of
   praiseworthiness, duty centers upon the problem of praise. All people
   have the capacity for moral generalization. All people do not have a
   highly functioning moral sense of conscience. The “vicegerents of God”
   that Smith is referring to are not just the sentiments involved with
   conscience. They encompass all our moral faculties, including our sense
   of propriety and impropriety, our sense of merit and demerit, and our
   sense of duty.
   The significance of the distinction between conscience and duty in
   Smith’s thought is revealed most clearly at the end of Chapter V in
   Part III. Smith emphasizes that while he wants to distinguish between
   duty and conscience, he does not want to say they are necessarily
   antithetical to one another. On the contrary, for the most part they
   complement one another. He comments that “the general rules by which
--

   There are natural limits to what we can do to impose the teaching of
   our consciences upon the world. But that does not mean that we must
   deny our consciences out of hand. Indignation in the face of perceived
   unfairness is a natural response of our conscience to the world at
   times. We may not always be able to construct the world in the way that
   we wish, but we do not have to like it at the deepest levels of our
