Subscribe now

What are the four main theories of consciousness?

By Anil Seth
---------------
[][][][][][][]

[What are the four main theories of consciousness?]

[]
---------------
Shutterstock / agsandrew

In the early days of modern consciousness science, back in the 1990s,
researchers focused on identifying empirical correlations between
aspects of conscious experience and properties of brain activity. This
search for the “neural correlates of consciousness” was motivated in
part as a response to concerns, pervasive through much of the 20th
century, that consciousness lay beyond the remit of science altogether.
But despite its many successes, this approach is limited because
correlations aren’t explanations, no matter how many you identify.

In recent years, however, there has been a blossoming of neurobiological
theories of consciousness. This is a sign of the field’s growing
maturity, because it is only when couched in terms of a theory that
experimental findings can deliver a satisfactory understanding of
consciousness.

There are currently four main theoretical approaches in consciousness
science. According to higher-order theories, a mental state is conscious
when another mental state – higher up in a hierarchy – says that it is.
For these theories, the devil is in the detail about what kinds of
“higher-order” representations count for consciousness.

Global workspace theories propose that mental states are conscious when
they are broadcast widely throughout the brain, so that they can be used
to flexibly guide behaviour. A good way to think about global workspace
theory is that consciousness depends on “fame in the brain” – conscious
mental states have access to a wide range of cognitive processes in ways
that unconscious mental states don’t.
---------------
Advertisement

Take our online consciousness course, where experts Anil Seth, Nicola Clayton and Christof Koch reveal neuroscience’s deepest mystery

These two theories focus on functional aspects of consciousness and
emphasise frontal (at the front) and parietal (towards the back and off
to the sides) brain regions. By contrast, integrated information theory
focuses on phenomenological aspects of consciousness – what it is like,
experientially – and proposes that consciousness is associated with a
posterior cortical “hot zone”, located towards the back of the brain and
including parts of the parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. According
to this theory, consciousness depends on the ability of a system to
generate integrated information.

The fourth approach, known as predictive processing, is more indirect,
being used primarily to build explanatory bridges between aspects of
consciousness and their underlying neural mechanisms. There are several
examples of this approach, ranging from those which associate
consciousness with top-down signalling in the brain to my own “beast
machine” theory. For these theories, the idea is that by progressively
accounting for diverse aspects of consciousness, they can ultimately
shift from being theories for consciousness science towards being
theories of consciousness itself.

Anil Seth is a Professor at the University of Sussex and author of the
new book Being You – A New Science of Consciousness (Faber/Dutton,
2021).

Read more on consciousness

-   Inside the strange truth of reality
-   Is the universe conscious? It seems impossible until you do the
    maths
-   Consciousness isn’t just the brain: The body shapes your sense of
    self

---------------
Sign up

More on What are the four main theories of consciousness?

Physics

Can we use quantum computers to test a radical consciousness theory?

Features
---------------
Definition

Consciousness

Free
