Subscribe

How does the human brain create consciousness, and why?

[]
---------------
subjective. Even so, researchers have begun to identify the changes in
brain activity that accompany awareness, and they also have some
fascinating ideas about why consciousness evolved.

[black and white photo portrait of female presenting person with color
pop blue wires layered over their eyes]Share on Pinterest

How much do we really know about human consciousness? Image credit:
Oxana Pervomay/Stocksy.

---------------
In the 1990s, the philosopher David Chalmers described this
inaccessibility to external, objective scrutiny as the “hard problem” of
consciousness.

He proposed that an easier task for scientists to tackle would be its
---------------

Apart from curiosity, scientists are most likely motivated to discover
the neural correlates of consciousness in order to help diagnose and
treat disorders of consciousness, such as persistent vegetative states
and some psychiatric disorders.

Three dimensions of consciousness

Consciousness has several distinct dimensions that they can measure.
Three of the most important ones are:

---------------

These three dimensions interact to produce our overall state of
consciousness from moment to moment. For example, when wide awake, we
are in a state of high awareness, but as we drift off to sleep at night,
both wakefulness and awareness subside.
---------------
we are awake.

In a similar way, altered states of consciousness, such as those induced
by psychedelic drugs or low oxygen levels, involve normal levels of
arousal but disorganized sensory experiences.
---------------
and awareness that are even lower than during non-REM sleep.

Meanwhile, in a strange hybrid state of consciousness known as
unresponsive wakefulness syndrome, or a vegetative state, patients
undergo daily cycles of sleep and wakefulness, but without showing any
---------------
instructions or follow a moving object with their eyes.

The neural correlates of consciousness

Patients in different states of consciousness have provided vital clues
about the neural correlates of consciousness.

Techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
---------------
network and cortical networks that are involved in attention.

In disorders of consciousness, researchers can see reduced functional
connectivity and physical damage that affects the connections between
the cortex and deep brain structures.
---------------

Despite advances in our understanding of the neural correlates of
consciousness, however, doctors still have trouble diagnosing patients
who are unable to respond to questions or commands.

---------------
connections.

“Consciousness is complex and studying it is like solving a scrambled
Rubik’s cube,” says first author Dr. Zirui Huang, research assistant
professor at the University of Michigan Medical School Department of
---------------
he adds.

Three gradients of consciousness

Dr. Huang and his colleagues looked at how gradients of neural activity
— as measured by fMRI — changed with the three main dimensions of
consciousness:

-   arousability or wakefulness
---------------
system and the somatomotor cortex, which helps to control movement.

“We demonstrated that disruptions of human consciousness — due to
pharmacological, neuropathological, or psychiatric causes — are
associated with a degradation of one or more of the major cortical
---------------
“According to our work, cortical gradient measurements have the
potential to reduce the uncertainty of clinical assessment of
consciousness in those patients,” he added.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation
---------------
Scientists like Dr. Huang have discovered a lot about its neural
correlates, but their findings do not shed much light on how the brain
generates consciousness — the “hard problem”.

Other scientists have argued that to learn more about the causes of
consciousness, you have to manipulate brain activity and see what
happens.

---------------
wakefulness and awareness fall.

Theories of consciousness

Despite advances in our understanding of the neural correlates of
consciousness, the question remains: How does consciousness arise from
brain activity?

---------------

The communication and integration of information between brain regions
is at the heart of many theories of consciousness.

One of these, IIT, uses a complex equation to calculate an entity’s
degree of consciousness from how well it integrates information.

According to the equation, even inanimate objects such as rocks and
teapots have a glimmer of consciousness.

This is in keeping with the philosophical theory of panpsychism, which
proposes that consciousness is a fundamental property of all physical
systems.

How it feels to control attention

Prof. Graziano has a problem with all these theories of consciousness.
He argues that they cannot even be termed theories because they do not
actually explain consciousness, they only describe it.

He likens this to the difference between Newton’s law of gravitation,
---------------
theory of general relativity, which explains what gravity actually is.

Prof. Graziano’s own theory of consciousness, the attention schema
theory, or AST, does not claim to have cracked the hard problem of
consciousness, but instead seeks to explain why we believe we are
conscious.

---------------

What is more, he argues that the attention schema leads people to
believe that they have an internal essence —consciousness — that allows
them to focus their attention.

---------------
sense of selfhood, time, or space.

This special state of consciousness has provided more clues about the
neural correlates of consciousness.

Researchers at the University of Freiburg in Germany used EEG to study
