Editorial

Consciousness

by Rick Lewis

It gives me particular pleasure to introduce an issue focussing on
consciousness, as I myself am sometimes conscious. I know the same goes
for many of you. But there is a great deal of debate among philosophers
about what this actually means.

The nature of consciousness is a philosophical problem which has come to
centre stage mainly in the last few years. As the neuroscientists have
gradually found out more and more about the workings of the brain,
---------------
course, is an understanding of how our subjective experiences come
about. This is what David Chalmers calls the ‘hard problem’ of
consciousness.

In this issue we have articles looking at this problem from a wide
variety of viewpoints. In the first of them, Mary Midgley says that many
people talk about consciousness as if the brain was in isolation. She
says we need to step back and see consciousness in its wider context,
which is the context of organic life.

---------------
– there can be few philosophers less in tune with the intellectual
spirit of the early 21st century than our Henri. Still, for that very
reason his ideas on consciousness give a completely different
perspective on the subject from that to which we’re now accustomed.

Some people approach the problem by pointing out that consciousness is
always consciousness of something. I was conscious of the gathering
clouds. You were conscious of the rain falling on your face. So, they
say, consciousness is always directed towards something. It has
‘aboutness’ or in philo-jargon, intentionality. This isn’t the only way
we talk about consciousness in everyday speech, however. As Jeanne
Warren points out in her article on John Macmurray, we also use it to
mean the opposite of unconsciousness – of being asleep, or in a coma.
There isn’t necessarily any huge divergence of meaning here, as when we
say “Has Fred regained consciousness?” we might be asking whether he has
become aware again of all the various things and people around him.

Though the theme of this issue is consciousness, a second, unanticipated
theme seems to have crept in as well. With articles on Henri Bergson,
John Macmurray and John Herschel, we have pieces on three thinkers who
---------------
jus in bello. If Gearhart is right, it should cease being seen as a
quaint relic of medieval thought and instead become the urgent concern
of ethicists everywhere. In a way this is also about consciousness, as
the choices soldiers make in wars are conscious choices, but ones made
under enormous stress and without the steadying framework of everyday
---------------
Igor Aleksander

Consciousness: Creeping Up on the Hard Problem by Jeffrey Gray

Reflections On Epilepsy
---------------
Defending Free Will & The Self

A Ridiculously Brief Overview of Consciousness

Consciousness Resurrected

Thought, Consciousness, Brains and Machines

Tags

consciousness

philosophy of mind
