Sign Up

Equity and good conscience definition

Related Definitions
---------------
Cite

Equity and good conscience means fairness as applied to a given set of
circumstances.

---------------
Copy

Equity and good conscience means fairness as applied to each individual
case after considering the totality of the circumstances.

---------------
Copy

Equity and good conscience means fairness as applied to a given set of
circumstances. (2) It will be against equity and good conscience to deny
waiver when repayment of the overpayment would deprive you of income
required to provide for basic necessities including food, shelter,
---------------
days. (3) The department may also consider, but is not limited to, the
following factors in determining whether waiver should be granted for
reasons of equity and good conscience: (a) Your general health,
including disability, competency, and mental or physical impairment; (b)
Your education level, including literacy; (c) Whether you are currently
---------------
of the full amount would cause you undue economic, physical, or mental
hardship. (4) When determining whether a waiver of benefit overpayments
may be granted based on equity and good conscience, the department must
consider whether the employer or employer's agent failed to respond
timely or adequately without good cause to the department's written
---------------
Copy

Examples of Equity and good conscience in a sentence

-   The individual’s age, physical and mental condition or the nature of
---------------
    statement that did not disclose material facts in his or her
    possession, or his or her ac- ceptance of an erroneous overpayment.§
    845.303 Equity and good conscience.

-   Unit 4 Federal Court, Development of Criminal Law (1790-1861),
    Development of Law in Muffossil (Justice, Equity and good
    conscience) Law reform & Law Commission, I, II & III Law Commission
    Report, Lex loci Report.

-   Equity and good conscience do not require restitution of those
    amounts.

-   Equity and good conscience must be considered on a case by case
    basis.

-   One of the main issues of the case was if a void lease could produce
    any effects in order to avoid a result contrary to conscience.50 The
    Court stated that the presence of a void lease did not prevent the
    plaintiff obtaining relief in Chancery: ‘… Equity and good
    conscience speak for the plaintiff ...

-   Equity and good conscience cannot compel BMO Harris to “restore” the
    full amount of the alleged ACH debit when BMO Harris never “had” or
    benefitted from those funds in the first place.

-   Equity and good conscience should be at the core of all governmental
    functions.

-   Evolution of Law of Torts:(i) England, forms of action, specific
    remedies from case to case.(ii) India, - Principles of Justice,
    Equity and good conscience, uncodified character, advantages and
    disadvantages.Definition, Nature, scope, and objects.(i) A wrongful
    act- violation of duty imposed by law, duty which is owed to people,
---------------
    within thirty (30) calendar days.

-   Equity and good conscience are generally satisfied when the
    indebtedness resulted from an administrative error and there is no
    indication of fraud, misrepresentation, fault, or lack of good faith
    on the part of the debtor.

More Definitions of Equity and good conscience

Equity and good conscience means fairness as applied to each individual
case after considering the totality of the circumstan- ces.

---------------
Copy

Related to Equity and good conscience

-   Cropland means land used for the production of adapted crops for
