   Use tab to navigate through the menu items.

GUILTY CONSCIENCE/BAD CONSCIENCE

   Guilt or guilty conscience is one of the most common negative or sad
   emotions that people experience almost every day. If not addressed
   properly, a guilty conscience can destroy your relationship, steal your
   joy, your happiness, and even your future. Yet, the majority of us
   don't know how to deal with it in a healthy way. According to the
   German philosopher, Friedrich Nietzsche (1844 - 1900). A guilty
   conscience can push a person to become very cruel and do horrible
   things as a result. Horrible things like killing, committing suicide,
   etc. Yet, just like any other emotions, there's not a clear definition
   for a "guilty conscience". So to better understand what it is, one has
   to explore the concept of right and wrong within society.

--
   maintain emotional and psychological balance, it is necessary to
   experience guilt for our bad behavior or actions. Besides, a guilty
   conscience is like having a snooze alarm in your head that won't shut
   off until it is addressed and it has to be addressed in a healthy way.

   If not addressed properly, a guilty conscience will make it very hard
   for you to think straight and make the right decisions when necessary,
   a guilty conscience can also trigger shame, anger, emptiness, and in
   many cases, sabotage your entire life and your relationship with
   others.

   A guilty conscience that is not addressed properly will also make you
   become very paranoid and delusional. For example; a guilty conscience
   may make you feel that everything people say or write in their social
   media pages is about you and then consider it as a personal attack
--
   defensively. Such behavior will eventually throw you off balance
   emotionally and psychologically and make you a good candidate for
   anxiety, depression, or much worse. A guilty conscience can also make
   you hate and punish yourself, avoid hearing nor seeing the person that
   you've wronged, it will also push you to talk negatively about that
--
   more harm to him/her should you get the opportunity.

   How to Effectively Deal with a Guilty Conscience?

   1) The first step in dealing with a guilty conscience is always to
   surrender to the truth (Repentance). This means to stop fighting or
   denying your guilt because the more you deny it the more intense the
--
   from that environment as soon as you can.

   3) The third step in dealing with a guilty conscience is to keep your
   emotions and behavior in check at all time. There's nothing more
   embarrassing for a person than not being unable to control his/her
--
   doing things it will repeat itself in your future also. 6) The sixth
   and final step is to always seek professional help (psychologist) if
   feel like you're overwhelmed by a guilty conscience because it can lead
   to more severe emotional or psychological situations, even suicide.

   #guilt #guiltyconscience
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
     * Psychology
--

   The First Impression
   GUILTY CONSCIENCE/BAD CONSCIENCE

   GUILTY CONSCIENCE/BAD CONSCIENCE
   PSYCHOLOGICAL DEFLECTION

