Philosophy

An Overview of the Leading Theories of Consciousness

Organizing and comparing the major candidate theories in the field.
--
Key points

     * Leading theories of consciousness include HOT, GWT, IIT, re-entry,
       and predictive processing theories.
     * Other well-developed theoretical approaches to consciousness
       involve attention, learning, and affect.
     * Many theories seek to solve the “hard problem” of consciousness,
       but not everyone agrees the problem exists.

--
   This post is Part I of a series.

   The field of consciousness studies has come of age. Prior to the 1990s,
   theories of consciousness were more of a philosophical pursuit than a
   serious scientific one. This was largely because scientists considered
   the domain of subjective experience—which is what consciousness
   fundamentally is—to be, well, too subjective. It just didn’t seem
   amenable to objective empirical study using the scientific method. And
   the whole concept of consciousness was considered too slippery and
   vague.

--
   psychiatry—one which relies heavily on subjective self-report by
   patients—when I talk with colleagues about my interest in the science
   of consciousness and tell them about the scientific conferences focused
   on it, which I like to attend, I am met with comments such as this one
   from a recent email exchange: “You brave, brave man, you—willing to
   wade into the bottomless pit of quicksand that is consciousness
   studies… I run, screaming, in the opposite direction.”

--
   rapidly developing sphere of neuroscience, with considerably less
   quicksand than before. An additional criticism could legitimately be
   that the topic of consciousness has attracted a huge number of mystical
   woo practitioners, but even if 99 percent of the field were comprised
   of pseudoscience, this conference and the large, vibrant scientific
--
The hard problem

   Inevitably, attempts to scientifically explain consciousness run up
   against the “explanatory gap” or what is called the “hard problem” of
   consciousness—the problem of subjective experience: Why it feels like
   something to be conscious.^1 Or, as the philosopher Thomas Nagel
   famously formulated it: “something that it is like to be.”^2 The
--

   In the early decades of the revival of scientific interest in studying
   consciousness, research focused on identifying the “neural correlates
   of consciousness” (NCCs), which are the essential neural events needed
   to produce conscious states. That search concentrated on brain states
   closely tied to consciousness. Over time, more attention has been
   directed toward developing theories of consciousness (ToCs). While the
   NCC approach looks for correlations between brain activity and
   consciousness, ToCs seek explanatory links between neural mechanisms
   and aspects of consciousness.

A proliferation of theories

   Presently we are still at a relatively early stage in the scientific
   study of consciousness. At this point, there are a great many theories
   of consciousness proliferating and competing with each other. Those
   theories sometimes seem to talk past each other as they explore vastly
   different approaches to the problem. Attempting to understand the
--

   Among the most helpful recent academic journal articles comparing
   different theories of consciousness is a 2022 paper by Anil Seth and
   Tim Bayne.^5

   Seth and Bayne focus their review mainly on the following four
   prominent theoretical approaches to consciousness. I will briefly
   summarize these here in simple terms:
    1. Higher-order theories (HOTs): These theories propose that thoughts
--
       according to the theory).
    3. Integrated information theory (IIT): This theory is about how parts
       of a brain interact to create a unified experience. Consciousness
       is theorized to be related to how much information is integrated
       among the different parts of the brain. IIT tries to mathematically
--
       theory suggests that not just brains but any complex system with
       the right level of interconnectedness and integration of
       information could exhibit consciousness, with simpler systems
       manifesting only an insignificant modicum of consciousness. IIT
       attempts to explain the quality of conscious experience, suggesting
       that the unique pattern of relationships between the elements of
--
       interprets bottom-up information received via its sense organs from
       the world around it. (Predictive processing theories are not
       specifically theories of consciousness but are more general
       accounts of brain function that can be used to formulate ideas
       about the properties of consciousness.)

   Philosophy Essential Reads
--

   Besides the above four categories of theories, Seth and Bayne also
   acknowledge other well-developed approaches to consciousness—ones that
   involve attention, learning, and affect:

   Theoretical approaches focused on attention:
     * Attention schema theory (AST): This is discussed in my post “Is
       Consciousness an Illusion?”

   Theoretical approaches focused on learning:
     * Unlimited associative learning (UAL): This is discussed in my post
       “Learning May Be the Key to the Evolution of Consciousness.” UAL
       arguably has the strongest evolutionary grounding of all the
       theories.^6
--
       local recurrency account.^7
     * Learning-based theories are also closely related to “selectionist”
       approaches, which ground consciousness in evolutionary-like
       dynamics within and between neuronal populations (referring to
       Gerald Edelman’s Neural Darwinism theory).^8
--
   Affect-based theories:
     * Damasio’s “self comes to mind” theory: According to this theory,
       consciousness depends on interactions between homeostatic routines
       and multilevel interoceptive maps, with affect and feeling at the
       core.^9 This is discussed in my posts “Are We All Zombies?” and
--
       predictions (Anil Seth’s “beast machine” theory—discussed in my
       posts “The Brain as a Prediction Machine: The Key to
       Consciousness?” and “The Key to the Self?” and Lisa Feldman
       Barrett’s theory^10).
     * Some affect-based theories consider cortical mechanisms to be
       unnecessary for consciousness, suggesting instead that the
       mechanisms of consciousness are located in the brainstem (e.g., the
       theories of Mark Solms^11 and Bjorn Merker^12)

--
   re-entry and predictive processing theories, following which we will be
   in a better position to judge whether the field is any closer to
   solving the “hard problem” of consciousness, or whether there really is
   such a problem at all.

--

   -- Northoff, G., & Lamme, V. (2020). Neural signs and mechanisms of
   consciousness: Is there a potential convergence of theories of
   consciousness in sight?. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews, 118,
   568–587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.019

   -- Doerig, A., Schurger, A., & Herzog, M. H. (2021). Hard criteria for
   empirical theories of consciousness. Cognitive neuroscience, 12(2),
   41–62. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2020.1772214

   -- Del Pin, S. H., Skóra, Z., Sandberg, K., Overgaard, M., & Wierzchoń,
   M. (2021). Comparing theories of consciousness: why it matters and how
   to do it. Neuroscience of consciousness, 2021(2), niab019.
   https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab019

   -- Signorelli, C. M., Szczotka, J., & Prentner, R. (2021). Explanatory
   profiles of models of consciousness - towards a systematic
   classification. Neuroscience of consciousness, 2021(2), niab021.
   https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab021

   -- Promet, L., & Bachmann, T. (2022). A comparative analysis of
   empirical theories of consciousness. Psychology of Consciousness:
   Theory, Research, and Practice. Advance online publication.
   https://doi.org/10.1037/cns0000341

   -- Yaron, I., Melloni, L., Pitts, M., & Mudrik, L. (2022). The ConTraSt
   database for analysing and comparing empirical studies of consciousness
   theories. Nature human behaviour, 6(4), 593–604.
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01284-5

   -- Seth, A. K., & Bayne, T. (2022). Theories of consciousness. Nature
   reviews. Neuroscience, 23(7), 439–452.
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00587-4

   4. Some of my previous posts covering theories of consciousness are
   listed later in this article. In addition, see the five-part series
   What Actually Is Consciousness, and How Did It Evolve? (parts 2, 4 and
   5 of that series are mentioned elsewhere in the current post). See also
   Mind-Body Problem: How Consciousness Emerges from Matter. And older
   posts such as How Could Mind Emerge From Mindless Matter? and What
   Actually Is a Thought? And How Is Information Physical? Among others.

   5. Seth, A. K., & Bayne, T. (2022). Theories of consciousness. Nature
   reviews. Neuroscience, 23(7), 439–452.
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00587-4.

   6. Another theory of consciousness with a strong evolutionary grounding
   is Feinberg and Mallatt's theory, which was previously reviewed by me
   but was not mentioned in Seth & Bayne's article. Feinberg and Mallatt's
--
   to Be Conscious. Trends in cognitive sciences, 24(2), 112–123.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.11.011; Lamme V. A. (2006). Towards
   a true neural stance on consciousness. Trends in cognitive sciences,
   10(11), 494–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.09.001.

   8. According to this theory, consciousness depends on re-entrant
   interactions reflecting a history of value-dependent learning events
   shaped by selectionist principles.
--

   11. Solms, M. The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of
   Consciousness (Profile Books, 2021). Solms' theory is congruent with
   the important work on affective neuroscience done by Jaak Panksepp and
   is also congruent with the Free Energy Principle by the influential
--
   Solms' theory also incorporates predictive processing.

   12. Merker, B. Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: a challenge for
   neuroscience and medicine. Behav. Brain Sci. 30, 63–81; discussion
   81–134 (2007).
