Class consciousness  

From The Art and Popular Culture Encyclopedia
---------------
Jump to: navigation, search

[This page Class consciousness is part of the politics
series.Illustration:Liberty Leading the People (1831, detail) by Eugène
Delacroix.]
---------------
[Enlarge]

This page Class consciousness is part of the politics series.
Illustration:Liberty Leading the People (1831, detail) by Eugène
Delacroix.
---------------
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Class consciousness is a term used in political theory, particularly
Marxism, to refer to the beliefs that a person holds regarding their
social class or economic rank in society, the structure of their class,
---------------
|                                                                       |
| -   1 Marxist theory                                                  |
| -   2 Georg Lukács' History and Class Consciousness (1923)            |
| -   3 Criticism                                                       |
| -   4 See also                                                        |
---------------

While German theorist Karl Marx rarely used the term "class
consciousness", he did make the distinction between "class in itself",
which is defined as a category of people having a common relation to the
means of production, and a "class for itself", which is defined as a
---------------
hereditary aristocracy, reinforced by the new gentry who owed their
success to commerce, industry, and the professions, evolved into an
"upper class". Its consciousness was formed in part by public schools
(in the British sense) and Universities. The upper class tenaciously
maintained control over the political system, depriving not only the
---------------
[edit]

Georg Lukács' History and Class Consciousness (1923)

Class consciousness, as described by Georg Lukács's famous History and
Class Consciousness (1923), is opposed to any psychological conception
of consciousness, which forms the basis of individual or mass psychology
(see Freud or, before him, Gustave Le Bon). According to Lukács, each
social class has a determined class consciousness which it can achieve.
In effect, as opposed to the liberal conception of consciousness as the
basis of individual freedom and of the social contract, Marxist class
consciousness is not an origin, but an achievement (i.e. it must be
"earned" or won). Hence, it is never assured: the proletariat's class
consciousness is the result of a permanent struggle to understand the
"concrete totality" of the historical process.

According to Lukács, the proletariat was the first class in history that
may achieve true class consciousness, because of its specific position
highlighted in the Communist Manifesto as the "living negation" of
capitalism. All others classes, including the bourgeoisie, are limited
to a "false consciousness" which impedes them from understanding the
totality of history: instead of understanding each specific moment as a
portion of a supposedly deterministic historical process, they
---------------
thought as a specific phase of history, but is naturalized and thought
of as an eternal solidified part of history. Says Lukács, this "false
consciousness", which forms ideology itself, is not a simple error as in
classical philosophy, but an illusion which cannot be dispelled.

---------------
Even if the bourgeois loses his individual point of view in an attempt
to grasp the reality of the totality of society and of the historical
process, he is condemned to a form of false consciousness. As an
individual, he will always see the collective result of individual
actions as a form of "objective law" to which he must submit himself
---------------
By contrast, the proletariat would be, according to Lukács, the first
class in history with the possibility to achieve a true form of class
consciousness, granting it knowledge of the totality of the historical
process.

---------------
thus, knowledge of itself is also, necessarily, knowledge of the reality
and of the totality of the historical process. The proletariat's class
consciousness is not immediate; class consciousness must not be mistaken
either with the consciousness of one's future and collective interests,
opposed to personal immediate interests.

The possibility of class consciousness is given by the objective process
of history, which transforms the proletariat into a commodity, hence
objectifying it. Class consciousness is thus not a simple subjective
act: "as consciousness here is not the consciousness of an object
opposed to itself, but the object's consciousness, the act of being
conscious of oneself disrupts the objectivity form of its object" (in
"Reification and the Proletariat's Consciousness" §3, III "The
proletariat's point of view"). In other words, instead of the bourgeois
subject and its corresponding ideological concept of individual free
will, the proletariat has been transformed into an object (a commodity)
which, when it takes consciousness of itself, transforms the very
structure of objectivity, that is of reality.

This specific role of the proletariat is a consequence of its specific
position; thus, for the first time, consciousness of itself (class
consciousness) is also consciousness of the totality (knowledge of the
entire social and historical process). Through dialectical materialism,
the proletariat understands that what the individual bourgeois conceived
---------------
so-called "laws" governing capitalism into universal principles, valid
in all times and places, are criticized by Lukács as a form of false
consciousness.

As the "expression of the revolutionary process itself", dialectical
materialism, which is the only theory with an understanding of the
totality of the historical process, is the theory which may help the
proletariat in its "struggle for class consciousness". Although Lukács
does not contest the Marxist primacy of the economic base on the
ideological superstructure (not to be mistaken with vulgar economic
determinism), he considers that there is a place for autonomous struggle
for class consciousness.

In order to achieve a unity of theory and praxis, theory must not only
---------------
"expression of the revolutionary process itself". In turn, a theory
which has as its goal helping the proletariat achieve class
consciousness must first be an "objective theory of class
consciousness". However, theory in itself is insufficient, and
ultimately relies on the struggle of humankind and of the proletariat
for consciousness: the "objective theory of class consciousness is only
the theory of its objective possibility".

---------------

Economist Ludwig Von Mises argued that "Marx confus[ed] the notions of
caste and class". Mises allowed that class consciousness, and the
associated class struggle, were valid concepts in some circumstances
where rigid social castes exist; e.g., when slavery is legal, and slaves
---------------

Philosopher Leszek Kołakowski argued that the "theory of class
consciousness is false" and that attempts by Marxist–Leninists to
advance the concept of class consciousness necessarily led to
totalitarianism.

---------------
and should act according to the class struggle pattern — but that they
are not always "class conscious". They suffer from "false
consciousness". But this is (a) not true; nor would it (b) help much if
it were.

---------------
b) Further if we assume that classes are as important as Marx thought
but that people do not act accordingly, because not having read Marx,
they are not class conscious – if "class consciousness" becomes
independent of class membership — and if class membership is neither
sufficient nor necessary to bring the expected class behaviour, then
---------------
See also

-   False consciousness

------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------

Unless indicated otherwise, the text in this article is either based on
Wikipedia article "Class consciousness" or another language Wikipedia
page thereof used under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License;
or on research by Jahsonic. See Art and Popular Culture's copyright
notice.

Retrieved from "http://artandpopularculture.com/Class_consciousness"

Views
