-   Key Concepts ›

Understanding Karl Marx's Class Consciousness and False Consciousness

Two of Marx's Key Social Precepts Defined
---------------
Updated on July 25, 2019

Class consciousness and false consciousness are concepts introduced by
Karl Marx that were later expanded by social theorists who came after
him. Marx wrote about the theory in his book "Capital, Volume 1," and
again with his frequent collaborator, Friedrich Engels, in the
impassioned treatise, "Manifesto of the Communist Party." Class
consciousness refers to the awareness by a social or economic class of
their position and interests within the structure of the economic order
and social system in which they live. In contrast, false consciousness
is a perception of one's relationships to social and economic systems of
an individual nature, and a failure to see oneself as a part of a class
---------------
social system.

 Marx's Theory of Class Consciousness 

According to Marxist theory, class consciousness is an awareness of
one's social and/or economic class relative to others, as well as an
understanding of the economic rank of the class to which you belong in
the context of the larger society. In addition, class consciousness
involves an understanding of the defining social and economic
characteristics and collective interests of your own class within the
constructs of the given socio-economic and political order.

Class consciousness is a core facet of Marx's theory of class conflict,
which focuses on the social, economic, and political relationships
between workers and owners within a capitalist economy. The precept was
---------------
shared economic and political interests, and the power inherent in their
numbers. Marx argued that when workers came to understand the totality
of these factors, they would achieve class consciousness, and this, in
turn, would lead to a workers' revolution that would overthrow the
exploitative system of capitalism.

Hungarian social theorist Georg Lukács, who followed in the tradition of
Marxist theory, expanded the concept by saying that class consciousness
is an achievement that opposes individual consciousness and results from
the group struggle to see the "totality" of social and economic systems.

 The Problem of False Consciousness 

According to Marx, before workers developed a class consciousness they
were actually living with a false consciousness. (Though Marx never used
the actual term, he did develop the ideas that it encompasses.) In
essence, false consciousness is the opposite of class consciousness.
Individualistic rather than collective in nature, it produces a view of
oneself as a single entity engaged in competition with others of one's
social and economic standing, rather than as part of a group with
unified experiences, struggles, and interests. According to Marx and
other social theorists who followed, false consciousness was dangerous
because it encouraged people to think and act in ways that were
counterintuitive to their economic, social, and political
self-interests.

Marx saw false consciousness as a product of an unequal social system
controlled by a powerful minority of elites. The false consciousness
among workers, which prevented them from seeing their collective
interests and power, was created by the material relations and
---------------
production frames relationships between people (workers and owners) as
relationships between things (money and products)—with playing a key
role in producing false consciousness among workers. He believed that
commodity fetishism served to obscure the fact that relations with
regard to production within a capitalist system are actually
---------------

Building on Marx's theory, Italian scholar, writer, and activist Antonio
Gramsci expanded the ideological component of false consciousness by
arguing that a process of cultural hegemony guided by those holding
economic, social, and cultural power in society produced a "common
---------------
person actually consents to the conditions of exploitation and
domination that one experiences. This "common sense"—the ideology that
produces false consciousness—is actually a misrepresentation and
misunderstanding of the social relationships that define the economic,
social, and political systems.

 False Consciousness in a Stratified Society 

An example of how cultural hegemony works to produce false
consciousness—that is true both historically and today—is the belief
that upward mobility is possible for all people, regardless of the
circumstances of their birth, as long as they choose to dedicate
---------------
that shape our lives.

At the time Marx was writing about class consciousness, he perceived
class as the relationship of people to the means of production—the
owners versus the workers. While the model is still useful, we can also
---------------
economically as an adult. However, as long as a person believes the
myth, he or she will continue to live and operate with a false
consciousness. Without a class consciousness, they will fail to
recognize that the stratified economic system in which they're operating
was designed to afford only the bare minimum of money to workers while
---------------
Your Citation

Crossman, Ashley. "Understanding Karl Marx's Class Consciousness and
False Consciousness." ThoughtCo, Jun. 25, 2024,
thoughtco.com/class-consciousness-3026135. Crossman, Ashley. (2024, June
25). Understanding Karl Marx's Class Consciousness and False
Consciousness. Retrieved from
https://www.thoughtco.com/class-consciousness-3026135 Crossman, Ashley.
"Understanding Karl Marx's Class Consciousness and False Consciousness."
ThoughtCo. https://www.thoughtco.com/class-consciousness-3026135
(accessed January 12, 2025).

---------------
    [Crowd reaching for globe]

    The Concept of Collective Consciousness
-   
    [Statue of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Berlin, Germany]
