   Damian K. F. Pang M.Sc.
   Damian K. F. Pang M.Sc.
   Consciousness and Beyond

Neuroscience

What Is Consciousness?

How to define the elusive concept of consciousness.

   Posted May 6, 2023 | Reviewed by Vanessa Lancaster
--
Key points

     * Consciousness is the active and subjective experiencing aspect of
       an experience.
     * Consciousness is what transforms a biochemical state into an
       experience.
     * Although we have mapped brain activity to specific conscious
--
       experiences.

   Consciousness is what we are most familiar with. Feeling the sun's
   warmth on our face, the joy of seeing someone we love, or the thrill of
   being on a rollercoaster—every single experience we ever had, from
   sensations to thoughts and emotions, is linked to consciousness. It
   seems paradoxical, but despite being at the centre of every experience,
   consciousness is difficult to define and still poorly understood
   scientifically.

   We know more about distant galaxies and the deepest ocean regions than
   we do about our consciousness. Even though consciousness has been
   discussed by philosophers for millennia and has become an active and
   thriving field of scientific research, it remains largely a mystery–but
--
   intimately acquainted with.

   So, what exactly is consciousness? Many have tried to answer this
   seemingly simple question (I will cover most of the influential views
   on this blog), but a universally agreed-upon definition still seems
--
   something extraordinary happens: The biological signals trigger a
   subjective conscious experience. We still don’t know much about how or
   why this happens, but consciousness lives on as an indisputable aspect
   of our minds. Although mysterious, it is also one of the most beautiful
   and meaningful aspects of our human experience: It makes life worth
--
   the famous unalienable right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
   happiness, found in the U.S. Declaration of Independence, are based on
   the human capacity to have experiences. Consciousness is the basis for
   our experiences and undergirds all of this.

   In its most basic sense, consciousness is linked to experience. In a
   way, it turns a state of the world or a specific configuration of
   atoms, molecules, organs, and everything else into an experience.
--
   dogma of the Ghost in the Machine.” A majority of scientists and
   philosophers reject this notion. However, it does mean that even though
   neural correlates of consciousness are incredibly useful, they don’t
   fully explain what consciousness is.
   Neuroscience Essential Reads

--

   Anil Seth, one of the leading researchers in this field, suggests that
   the ultimate (or what he calls the “real question of consciousness”) is
   answering why a particular brain activity results in a specific
   conscious experience and not merely establishing that it does (Seth,
--
   few accept), the experience itself would still be real. Any
   philosophical, psychological, or neurobiological theory of
   consciousness is incomplete without a full account of experiences,
   which brings us back to the act of experiencing.

What exactly is consciousness?

   So, what exactly is consciousness? It is what we are most familiar with
   and what undergirds every perception, emotion, and thought we have. At
   the same time, it is an elusive notion that is difficult to define. I
--
   References

   Frankish, K. (2016). Illusionism as a theory of consciousness. Journal
   of Consciousness Studies, 23(11-12), 11-39.

   Olschewski, A., Hempelmann, G., Vogel, W., & Safronov, B. V. (1998).
--
   readings. Oxford University Press.

   Seth, A. (2021). The real problem of consciousness. Psychology Today.
   URL:
   https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/consciousness-deep-dive/202110/
   the-real-problem-consciousness
   (BUTTON) More references
     * Share on Facebook Share
--
   Damian K. F. Pang M.Sc.

   Damian K. F. Pang, M.Sc., is a researcher focusing on consciousness,
   perception, and memory as well as the philosophy of mind and the
   similarities and differences between human cognition and AI.
