        -   Scripture Reflections on Reconciliation
        -   Guides to Moral Living
        -   Forming Your Conscience
        -   Examination of Conscience
        -   Preparation for First Confession & First Communion [] []
            -   Sacrament Preparation Policy
---------------
        -   Fasting and Abstinence Guidelines

 How to Form a Moral Conscience 

-   
---------------
         

        What is a Moral Conscience?

           According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church, a human
        person “has in his heart a law inscribed by God,” “calling him
        to love.”  This is a person’s moral conscience. (#1776)

           In their document Forming Consciences for Faithful
        Citizenship, the U.S. bishops said " Conscience is not something
        that allows us to justify doing whatever we want, nor is it a
        mere ‘feeling’ about what we should or should not do. Rather,
        conscience is the voice of God resounding in the human heart,
        revealing the truth to us and calling us to do what is good
        while shunning what is evil.”
           The moral conscience urges a person “to do good and avoid
        evil;” it also judges particular choices, approving those which
        are good and disapproving those which are evil. (Catechism of
        the Catholic Church, #1777)  Our conscience enables us to
        understand the principles of morality, decide how to apply those
        principles in specific circumstances, and judge the moral status
        of concrete acts. (#1780)
           The human person "has the right to act in conscience and in
        freedom" and “must always obey the certain judgment of his
        conscience.” (#1782, 1790)
           The Catechism says a person’s moral conscience must be
        informed and enlightened so that it “formulates its judgments
        according to reason, [and] in conformity with the true good"
        willed by God. (#1783)  Shaping a well-formed conscience is a
        lifelong task which is rooted in the Word of God, assisted by
        the gifts of the Holy Spirit, aided by the witness or advice of
---------------
        conversion or charity may all be a source of errors in moral
        judgment.  "One must therefore work to correct the errors of
        moral conscience." (1792, 1793)
           The Catechism says that individuals are “sometimes confronted
        by situations that make moral judgments less assured and
---------------
        •   •   •

        How to Form a Moral Conscience

        Here are some guidelines for how to form a moral conscience,
        particul-arly in a situation where you may misunderstand or
        disagree with a specific truth or teaching of the Church:
---------------
        conclusions which the Church officially accepts at a later date,
        most of us are not prophets.
        If we are led by a morally responsible conscience to believe or
        act in a way which is contrary to what the Church teaches at the
        present time, we should continue to assume that the Church is
---------------
        spiritual life of the Catholic Church, being careful not to give
        scandal to others who may be confused by our belief or behavior.
        If we are led by a morally responsible conscience to believe or
        act in a way which is contrary to what the Church teaches at the
        present time, we should do so with a spirit of humility and
---------------
        God's love and mercy.
        Learn More
        > The Relationship Between Authority and Conscience.
        > What to Do When You Disagree with the Church.
         > Disagreeing With the Church
         > Your Conscience--How You Can Follow It and Follow Christ
        (podcast)
         > What is the status of a Catholic who has an abortion?
         > The Catholic conflict over conscience
         > What Constitutes an Abuse of Conscience?

        [Last Update: 06.15.22]
---------------
        Links

        -   Catechism of the Catholic Church on Conscience

Waterloo Catholic Faith Formation
