     * Tutoring & essay marking

Conscience

   OCR
   Ethics

Religious views on conscience

Aquinas’ Natural moral law
--
   conclude the secondary precept that euthanasia is wrong.

Aquinas’ view of the conscience

   Natural law is Aquinas’ theory on how God is the grounding and source
   of morality. Conscience is about the human psychology involved in
   understanding and applying natural moral law. Conscience is ratio
   (reason) used to understand and apply God’s natural law.

   Aquinas claims that the classic features of conscience follow from the
   application of our knowledge of the natural moral law to our moral
   actions, in three ways:
    1. Witness – by knowing whether we have done or not done something.
    2. Bind & incite – “through the conscience we judge that something
       should be done or not done”
    3. Accuse, torment & rebuke – “by conscience we judge that something
       done is well done or ill done”

   This is how the conscience causes guilt. Conscience is our ability to
   know whether we have done something, whether we should have done it,
   and whether it was done well. If we have done something wrong, our
   conscience will accuse, torment and rebuke us – causing feelings of
   guilt.

   Because human reason is fallible, the conscience thereby becomes
   fallible. We could be mistaken for example when we don’t know how a
   general rule applies to a certain situation (mistake in conscientia).
--
   actions are called apparent goods because they only appear good to
   someone engaged in faulty reasoning. They are not real goods. Despite
   this potential for our conscience judging something bad to be good,
   Aquinas still insists we must follow it:

   “Every judgment of conscience, be it right or wrong … is obligatory …
   he who acts against his conscience always sins”

   This is because if you choose to act against your conscience, then you
   are choosing to do something you believe to be evil. Conscience is thus
   always ‘binding’.

Vincible vs invincible ignorance

   Whether errors in conscience that lead to sinful acts will be forgiven
   or pardoned depends on the type of ignorance that caused the error.

--
   very statement that man is estranged from his created nature
   presupposes an experience of the abyss between what he essentially is
   and what is existentially is. Even a weak or misled conscience is still
   a conscience, namely, the silent voice of man’s own essential nature,
   judging his actual being” – Tillich.

   To deny that our conscience can discover the natural law is to claim
   that there is a gap between what we currently are and what we could be.
   Yet, to have an awareness of that gap is to have a conscience that is
   aware of its fallen state. So it is contradictory to deny the natural
   law. Even it now involves a weakened conscience, that still tells us at
   least something of the direction we have fallen in and the direction
   back towards righteousness.

   However, whatever a weak and misled conscience discovers is surely not
   God’s morality. Humanity believing it has the ability to know anything
   of God is the same arrogance that caused Adam and Eve to disobey God.
--
   inability to be humble enough to simply have faith.

Psychological views on the conscience

Sigmund Freud

   Freud thought the conscience was just the result of psychological
   forces that science could understand. Freud believed the mind was
   divided into the Id (our unconscious animalistic desires), Ego (Our
--
   which Freud thought responsible for many mental problems.

   The ethical implications is that conscience is not the voice of God in
   us, it is just what our society wants from us. Our society might be
   good or bad, therefore our conscience is not the best guide if Freud is
   right. Furthermore there might not even be a ‘good or bad’, if morality
   is merely the conditioning of societies on its members.
--
   Mature genital stage: lasts until death. Controlled sexual desires
   result in a desire for love and marriage. A person now has a fully
   developed conscience where the ego controls the Id with reference to
   the superego.

--
   can thus be seen to defend Freud to some degree from the accusation of
   being unscientific. He studied the development of children and argued
   that there occurs a fundamental shift in the nature of ‘conscience’.
   Before the age of 11 children have what he called heteronomous
   morality. This means they merely associate actions as bad because of
--
   to act and why.

Freud’s critique of religion’s approach to developing the conscience

   Maintaining social order depends on people repressing their anti-social
--
   After millennia of religious rule, too many people are still unhappy
   being controlled by social rules. Freud claims this is because the
   religious approach to conscience is external imposition by authority,
   similar to how children are treated, the result being comparable to a
   ‘childhood neurosis’. Although rules are in place to reduce suffering,
--

   Perhaps Freud’s critique only really works against approaches to the
   conscience like Augustine’s where it simply involves an external
   imposition of God’s law.

Possible exam questions for Conscience

   Easy
   Critically compare Aquinas and Freud’s view of the conscience
   Are the workings of God present in the conscience?

   Medium
   ‘Freud makes more sense of the concept of guilt than Aquinas’ –
   Discuss.
   Does a theological approach to conscience work better than a
   psychological approach?
   Critically compare Aquinas and Freud’s views on the process of moral
--

   Hard
   Does conscience exist at all or is it an umbrella term for culture,
   environment, genetics and education?
   Is conscience merely an umbrella term for the psychological factors
   involved in moral decision making?
   Critically assess Freud’s psychosexual approach.
--

   Year 13 ethics topics:
   Meta-ethics. Conscience. Sexual ethics.

   OCR Philosophy
