[]

Examining the Role of Conscience in Making Moral Decisions

 [Examining the Role of Conscience in Making Moral Decisions]

[]
---------------
[]

Q: I disagree with some of the teachings of the Catholic Church. I was once told that I don’t have to follow all of the church’s teachings if they violate my conscience. But still, I’m not sure that’s right.

A: First, I want to commend you for asking this question. The fact that
---------------
asked someone who ought to be able to give some guidance on what was a
difficult moral question. In response, they seemed to get an answer that
indicated that, in the end, they had to just “follow their conscience.”

I can understand this. In the course of my life as a priest, I have
---------------
right decision-making, the right way to go remained foggy and difficult.

  “When he listens to his conscience, the prudent man can hear God
  speaking” —CCC 1777

In addition, the Catechism of the Catholic Church teaches: “When he
listens to his conscience, the prudent man can hear God speaking” (CCC
1777). Because of this line and others that highlight the importance of
conscience, it is tempting to take the default position of “whatever you
feel is right, just do that.”

---------------
true.

Second, the church’s teaching on conscience presumes knowledge of the
moral law. This means that those who are exercising conscience know that
there is a real right and a real wrong. Unfortunately, there are fewer
people who acknowledge this reality. This places us in a unique place in
---------------
a nationwide study on the moral life of 18- to 29-year-olds. His
conclusion was that this age group, generally speaking, has neither the
vocabulary nor the categories to make moral decisions. If conscience
depends on principles of right and wrong, how will these young people
make decisions? According to Smith, they base their decisions on
feelings.

But conscience is not a feeling. The catechism clearly states that
conscience “formulates its judgments according to reason, in conformity
with the true good willed by the wisdom of the Creator” (CCC 1783). This
means employing one’s mind more than one’s emotions to make decisions.
Conscience is not merely some feeling we get; it is the critical
application of truth to the present issue.

Third, it is true that, a person “must not be forced to act contrary to
his conscience. Nor must he be prevented from acting according to his
conscience, especially in religious matters” (CCC 1782). But this does
not mean doing whatever pleases me.

---------------
the church’s constant teaching against artificial birth control in the
document “Humanae Vitae,” many couples were encouraged to dismiss this
teaching if it “violated their conscience.” Unfortunately, as a result,
many couples were obliquely encouraged to invite a sinful practice into
their sexual relationship. Even more, they were led to believe that they
---------------

Because that is all this comes down to. The church’s teaching on
contraception does not “violate” a person’s conscience. Unless a person
truly believed that periodic abstinence in marriage was an evil (which
is all that is being asked for through natural family planning), then
there is no conscience issue here. It is an issue of a) not knowing or
understanding the church’s teaching (which could be remedied by asking
someone who knows), b) lacking the will to choose the good (which is
---------------
After all of this, if we still have reasonable doubt regarding what to
do, we ought to do the following. First, pray. Second, it is wise to
examine your conscience regularly. Third, choose to do good. Fourth,
seek wise and holy counsel from someone who is not only educated in the
area of morality but who personally defers to the wisdom of Christ and
---------------
all else. Even in very difficult circumstances, God can be trusted.

Examining the Role of Conscience in Making Moral
Decisions2016-02-012018-09-25https://bulldogcatholic.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/umd-newman-logo-373x230px.pngBulldog
Catholichttps://bulldogcatholic.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/bulldog-catholic-ask-father-mike-blog-examining-the-role-of-conscience-in-making-moral-decisions.jpg200px200px

[]
