          + Emotions, moods, and traits
     * (BUTTON) Main problematic phenomena
          + Consciousness
          + Rationality
               o Deduction
--
               o Block’s “nation of China”
     * (BUTTON) Further issues
          + Consciousness reconsidered
               o Executives, buffers, and HOTs
               o “What it’s like”
--
   Philosophy & Religion Philosophical Issues

Consciousness

   inphilosophy of mind inMain problematic phenomena
--
   See all related content

   The word consciousness is used in a variety of ways that need to be
   distinguished. Sometimes the word means merely any human mental
   activity at all (as when one talks about the “history of
   consciousness”), and sometimes it means merely being awake (as in As
   the anesthetic wore off, the animal regained consciousness). The most
   philosophically troublesome usage concerns phenomena with which people
   seem to be “directly acquainted”—as the British philosopher Bertrand
--

   It turns out to be surprisingly difficult to say much about
   consciousness that is not highly controversial. Initial efforts in the
   19th century to approach psychology with the rigour of other
   experimental sciences led researchers to engage in careful
--
   the consequent pitfalls of thinking of conscious processes as the
   central subject matter of psychology. While it can seem natural to
   think that all mental phenomena are accessible to consciousness, close
   attention to the full range of cases suggests otherwise. The
   Austrian-born British philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) was
--
   In a related vein, the American linguist Ray Jackendoff proposed that
   one is never directly conscious of abstract ideas, such as goodness and
   justice—they are not items in the stream of consciousness. At best, one
   is aware of the perceptual qualities one might associate with such
   ideas—for example, an image of someone acting in a kindly way. While it
--

   Partly out of frustration with introspectionism, psychologists during
   the first half of the 20th century tended to ignore consciousness
   entirely and instead study only “objective behaviour” (see below
   Radical behaviourism). In the last decades of the century,
   psychologists began to turn their attention once again to consciousness
   and introspection, but their methods differed radically from those of
   early introspectionists, in ways that can be understood against the
--
   all. If a person does not have immediate knowledge of it, why is it not
   merely part of the purely physical machinery of the brain? Why bring in
   mentality at all? Accessibility to consciousness, however, is not the
   only criterion for determining whether a given state or process is
   mental. One alternative criterion is that mental states and processes
