-   Key Concepts ›

The Concept of Collective Consciousness

What It Is and How It Holds Society Together
---------------
Updated on January 16, 2019

Collective consciousness (sometimes collective conscience or conscious)
is a fundamental sociological concept that refers to the set of shared
beliefs, ideas, attitudes, and knowledge that are common to a social
group or society. The collective consciousness informs our sense of
belonging and identity, and our behavior. Founding sociologist Émile
Durkheim developed this concept to explain how unique individuals are
bound together into collective units like social groups and societies.

 How Collective Consciousness Holds Society Together 

What is it that holds society together? This was the central question
---------------
because unique individuals feel a sense of solidarity with each other.
This is why we can form collectives and work together to achieve
community and functional societies. The collective consciousness,
or conscience collective as he wrote it in French, is the source of this
solidarity.

Durkheim first introduced his theory of the collective consciousness in
his 1893 book "The Division of Labor in Society". (Later, he would also
rely on the concept in other books, including "Rules of the Sociological
---------------
and sentiments common to the average members of a society." Durkheim
observed that in traditional or primitive societies, religious symbols,
discourse, beliefs, and rituals fostered the collective consciousness.
In such cases, where social groups were quite homogenous (not distinct
by race or class, for example), the collective consciousness resulted in
what Durkheim termed a "mechanical solidarity" — in effect an automatic
binding together of people into a collective through their shared
---------------
others in order to allow for a society to function. In cases such as
these, religion still played an important role in producing collective
consciousness among groups of people affiliated with various religions,
but other social institutions and structures would also work to produce
the collective consciousness necessary for this more complex form of
solidarity, and rituals outside of religion would play important roles
in reaffirming it.

 Social Institutions Produce Collective Consciousness 

These other institutions include the state (which fosters patriotism and
---------------

In either case — primitive or modern societies — collective
consciousness is something "common to the whole of society," as Durkheim
put it. It is not an individual condition or phenomenon, but a social
one. As a social phenomenon, it is "diffused across society as a whole,"
and "has a life of its own." It is through collective consciousness that
values, beliefs, and traditions can be passed down through generations.
Though individual people live and die, this collection of intangible
---------------
our social institutions and thus exist independent of individual people.

Most important to understand is that collective consciousness is the
result of social forces that are external to the individual, that course
through society, and that work together to create the social phenomenon
of the shared set of beliefs, values, and ideas that compose it. We, as
individuals, internalize these and make the collective consciousness a
reality by doing so, and we reaffirm and reproduce it by living in ways
that reflect it.
---------------
Your Citation

Cole, Nicki Lisa, Ph.D. "The Concept of Collective Consciousness."
ThoughtCo, Apr. 5, 2023,
thoughtco.com/collective-consciousness-definition-3026118. Cole, Nicki
Lisa, Ph.D. (2023, April 5). The Concept of Collective Consciousness.
Retrieved from
https://www.thoughtco.com/collective-consciousness-definition-3026118
Cole, Nicki Lisa, Ph.D. "The Concept of Collective Consciousness."
ThoughtCo.
https://www.thoughtco.com/collective-consciousness-definition-3026118
(accessed January 12, 2025).

---------------
    attention to the cause.]

    Understanding Karl Marx's Class Consciousness and False
    Consciousness
-   
    [Students in a classroom wearing uniforms and raising hands]
