[][][][][]

[]

[]

-   Health Conditions[]
    Health Conditions

    -   Alzheimer's & Dementia
    -   Anxiety
    -   Asthma & Allergies
    -   Atopic Dermatitis
    -   Breast Cancer
    -   Cancer
    -   Cardiovascular Health
    -   COVID-19
    -   Diabetes
    -   Environment & Sustainability
    -   Exercise & Fitness
    -   Eye Health
    -   Headache & Migraine
    -   Health Equity
    -   HIV & AIDS
    -   Human Biology
    -   Leukemia
    -   LGBTQIA+
    -   Men's Health
    -   Mental Health
    -   Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
    -   Nutrition
    -   Parkinson's Disease
    -   Psoriasis
    -   Psoriatic Arthritis
    -   Sexual Health
    -   Ulcerative Colitis
    -   Women's Health
-   Health Products[]
    Health Products

    All
    -   Nutrition & Fitness
    -   Vitamins & Supplements
    -   CBD
    -   Sleep
    -   Mental Health
    -   At-Home Testing
    -   Men’s Health
    -   Women’s Health
-   Discover[]
    News

    -   Latest News

    Original Series

    -   Medical Myths
    -   Honest Nutrition
    -   Through My Eyes
    -   New Normal Health

    Podcasts

    All
    -   Brain health, sleep, diet: 3 health resolutions for 2025
    -   5 things everyone should know about menopause
    -   3 ways to slow down type 2 diabetes-related brain aging
    -   Toxic metals in tampons: Should you be worried?
    -   Can tattoos cause blood or skin cancer?
    -   Can we really ‘outrun the Grim Reaper’?
-   Tools[]
    General Health

    -   Drugs A-Z
    -   Health Hubs
    -   Newsletter

    Health Tools

    -   Find a Doctor
    -   BMI Calculators and Charts
    -   Blood Pressure Chart: Ranges and Guide
    -   Breast Cancer: Self-Examination Guide
    -   Sleep Calculator

    Quizzes

    -   RA Myths vs Facts
    -   Type 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood Sugar
    -   Ankylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or Fiction
-   Connect[]
    About Medical News Today

    -   Who We Are
    -   Our Editorial Process
    -   Content Integrity
    -   Conscious Language

    Find Community

    -   Bezzy Breast Cancer
    -   Bezzy MS
    -   Bezzy IBD
    -   Bezzy Psoriasis

    Follow Us

Subscribe

How does the human brain create consciousness, and why?

[]

Written by James Kingsland on January 21, 2023 — Fact checked by Harriet
Pike, Ph.D.

Scientists and philosophers have long struggled to explain how the brain
generates conscious experiences. Some doubt whether the objective tools
of science can ever get to grips with a phenomenon that is so
subjective. Even so, researchers have begun to identify the changes in
brain activity that accompany awareness, and they also have some
fascinating ideas about why consciousness evolved.

[black and white photo portrait of female presenting person with color
pop blue wires layered over their eyes]Share on Pinterest

How much do we really know about human consciousness? Image credit:
Oxana Pervomay/Stocksy.

How the brain conjures conscious awareness from the electrical activity
of billions of individual nerve cells remains one of the great
unanswered questions of life.

Each of us knows that we are conscious, in terms of having thoughts,
perceptions, and feelings, but we are unable to prove it to anyone else.
Only we have access to the mysterious essence that allows us to
experience those thoughts, perceptions, and feelings.

In the 1990s, the philosopher David Chalmers described this
inaccessibility to external, objective scrutiny as the “hard problem” of
consciousness.

He proposed that an easier task for scientists to tackle would be its
“neural correlates” — where and how brain activity changes when people
have conscious experiences.

Apart from curiosity, scientists are most likely motivated to discover
the neural correlates of consciousness in order to help diagnose and
treat disorders of consciousness, such as persistent vegetative states
and some psychiatric disorders.

Three dimensions of consciousness

Consciousness has several distinct dimensions that they can measure.
Three of the most important ones are:

-   wakefulness or physiological arousal
-   awareness or the ability to have conscious mental experiences,
    including thoughts, feelings, and perceptions
-   sensory organization, or how different perceptions and more abstract
    concepts become woven together to create a seamless conscious
    experience.

These three dimensions interact to produce our overall state of
consciousness from moment to moment. For example, when wide awake, we
are in a state of high awareness, but as we drift off to sleep at night,
both wakefulness and awareness subside.

Awareness and physiological arousal return during REM (rapid eye
movement) sleep, which is when vivid dreams are mostly likely to occur.
But these sensory experiences are mostly disconnected from external
stimuli and detached from the concepts that anchor us to reality while
we are awake.

In a similar way, altered states of consciousness, such as those induced
by psychedelic drugs or low oxygen levels, involve normal levels of
arousal but disorganized sensory experiences.

These can include hallucinations of sounds, smells, or sights, but also
synesthesia, when there is cross-talk between usually discrete senses,
such as sounds that evoke visual experiences.

People in a coma, or under anesthesia, can have levels of wakefulness
and awareness that are even lower than during non-REM sleep.

Meanwhile, in a strange hybrid state of consciousness known as
unresponsive wakefulness syndrome, or a vegetative state, patients
undergo daily cycles of sleep and wakefulness, but without showing any
sign of awareness.

Despite spending long periods with their eyes open, they do not exhibit
behavioral responses to external stimuli.

Some of these patients will recover limited signs of awareness, known as
a “minimally conscious state,” such as the ability to respond to
instructions or follow a moving object with their eyes.

The neural correlates of consciousness

Patients in different states of consciousness have provided vital clues
about the neural correlates of consciousness.

Techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
electroencephalography (EEG) have revealed the neural activity that
accompanies these states.

Scientists detect patterns of activity through measures of functional
connectivity, using statistical techniques to reveal correlations
between the timing of neural events in different parts of the brain.

This reveals the networks of brain regions that are involved in working
memory, attention, and mind-wandering, for example.

When they combine data from fMRI and EEG, researchers discover that
activity deep inside the brain, in the thalamus, varies during
wakefulness in step with activity in the default mode network.

The thalamus operates like a sensory relay station, while the default
mode network is a collection of regions within the cortex — the
outermost layer of the brain — that are intimately involved in
mind-wandering and self-awareness.

By contrast, during non-REM sleep and under anesthetic, functional
connectivity breaks down between the thalamus and the default mode
network and cortical networks that are involved in attention.

In disorders of consciousness, researchers can see reduced functional
connectivity and physical damage that affects the connections between
the cortex and deep brain structures.

This demonstrates how important these connections are for maintaining
wakefulness and information exchange across the brain.

The terrain of brain activity

Despite advances in our understanding of the neural correlates of
consciousness, however, doctors still have trouble diagnosing patients
who are unable to respond to questions or commands.

They cannot tell whether such a patient is completely unconscious,
conscious but disconnected from external stimuli, or conscious and aware
of their environment, but unable to respond.

A completely new approach, reported recently in Nature Communications,
may provide a way to assess such a patient’s wakefulness, awareness, and
sensory organization.

Rather than recording the activity in particular brain regions or
networks of regions, the new technique measures gradients of activity
across the brain.

This is analogous to recording the steepness of terrain on a map, and
how that steepness might change over time, rather than just the
locations of roads, towns, and villages.

This innovative way of investigating brain activity, which considers how
functional geometry shapes temporal dynamics, takes into account the
fact that each region and network has multiple functions and
connections.

“Consciousness is complex and studying it is like solving a scrambled
Rubik’s cube,” says first author Dr. Zirui Huang, research assistant
professor at the University of Michigan Medical School Department of
Anesthesiology.

“If you look at just a single surface, you may be confused by the way it
is organized. You need to work on the puzzle looking at all dimensions,”
he adds.

Three gradients of consciousness

Dr. Huang and his colleagues looked at how gradients of neural activity
— as measured by fMRI — changed with the three main dimensions of
consciousness:

-   arousability or wakefulness
-   awareness
-   sensory integration.

The researchers drew on existing fMRI data recorded from the brains of
people who were awake, under anesthetic, in a so-called vegetative state
— known as “unresponsive wakefulness syndrome” — or who had a
psychiatric diagnosis such as schizophrenia.

They discovered an activity gradient that corresponded to changes in
arousal levels that stretched from the visual and default mode areas to
networks involved in attention.

Another gradient changed in step with awareness and stretched from
regions involved in perception and action to regions responsible for the
integration of information and formation of abstract concepts.

A third gradient, linked to sensory organization, spanned the visual
system and the somatomotor cortex, which helps to control movement.

“We demonstrated that disruptions of human consciousness — due to
pharmacological, neuropathological, or psychiatric causes — are
associated with a degradation of one or more of the major cortical
gradients depending on the state,” notes Dr. Huang.

He told Medical News Today that some patients who are unable to respond
in any way may still be conscious. “It is therefore important to develop
behavior-independent and task-independent approaches to assessment,” he
said.

“According to our work, cortical gradient measurements have the
potential to reduce the uncertainty of clinical assessment of
consciousness in those patients,” he added.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation

Scientists like Dr. Huang have discovered a lot about its neural
correlates, but their findings do not shed much light on how the brain
generates consciousness — the “hard problem”.

Other scientists have argued that to learn more about the causes of
consciousness, you have to manipulate brain activity and see what
happens.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation, or TMS, is a noninvasive technique
that changes brain activity in a tightly controlled way.

The technique involves passing a strong electrical pulse through a
conductive coil held close to the participant’s head, creating a brief
magnetic pulse that induces electrical activity in the part of the brain
closest to the coil.

This boosts the electrical activity of millions of neurons within a
region just a few centimeters in diameter.

In an awake participant, a TMS pulse triggers a complex chain of
activity across multiple cortical areas, whereas in non-REM sleep, the
same pulse has a much briefer, more localized effect.

During REM sleep, however, the pulse evokes a pattern of activity
similar to that seen in the brain of a person who is wide awake.

Intriguingly, in patients who are awake but in a vegetative state, TMS
induces short-lived, local effects that are similar to those seen during
the non-REM sleep of a healthy person.

But in the brain of awake, minimally conscious patients, TMS evokes a
similar response to that seen in healthy, awake people.

Researchers have therefore concluded that the complexity and spatial
extent of communication between brain regions subsides as levels of
wakefulness and awareness fall.

Theories of consciousness

Despite advances in our understanding of the neural correlates of
consciousness, the question remains: How does consciousness arise from
brain activity?

Scientists have proposed several theories. Two prominent ideas are
global neuronal workspace theory (GNWT) and integrated information
theory (IIT).

Global neuronal workspace

In brief, GNWT proposes that there is a network of long-range
connections that span the brain, called the global workspace.

Neural information becomes conscious when it gains access to this
workspace, which allows it to be broadcast throughout the brain,
including to specialized hubs for memory, perception, motor output, and
attention.

Crucially, it is a case of “winner takes all” for a particular
interpretation of sensory data when it gains access to the global
workspace.

According to Prof. Michael Graziano, professor of psychology and
neuroscience at the Princeton Neuroscience Institute, NJ, and Dr.
AaronSchurger, assistant professor in the Crean College of Health and
Behavioral Sciences at Chapman University in Irvine, CA, this explains,
for example, “bistable” optical illusions.

Two examples of these are the Necker cube and face-vase illusion, in
which conscious awareness switches between two alternative
interpretations of the same sensory data.

Integrated information

The communication and integration of information between brain regions
is at the heart of many theories of consciousness.

One of these, IIT, uses a complex equation to calculate an entity’s
degree of consciousness from how well it integrates information.

According to the equation, even inanimate objects such as rocks and
teapots have a glimmer of consciousness.

This is in keeping with the philosophical theory of panpsychism, which
proposes that consciousness is a fundamental property of all physical
systems.

How it feels to control attention

Prof. Graziano has a problem with all these theories of consciousness.
He argues that they cannot even be termed theories because they do not
actually explain consciousness, they only describe it.

He likens this to the difference between Newton’s law of gravitation,
which is an equation that calculates gravitational force, and Einstein’s
theory of general relativity, which explains what gravity actually is.

Prof. Graziano’s own theory of consciousness, the attention schema
theory, or AST, does not claim to have cracked the hard problem of
consciousness, but instead seeks to explain why we believe we are
conscious.

According to AST, animal brains evolved a model — or schema — of their
current state of attention that they could use to predict and control
their ongoing focus of attention.

In order to control our bodies, the brain uses an internal model of our
limbs, their location in space, and how they work. Prof. Graziano
believes the control of attention is no different.

What is more, he argues that the attention schema leads people to
believe that they have an internal essence —consciousness — that allows
them to focus their attention.

Content-free awareness

Amazingly, expert meditators may be able to achieve a state of pure
awareness, free from any thoughts, perceptions, feelings, or even a
sense of selfhood, time, or space.

This special state of consciousness has provided more clues about the
neural correlates of consciousness.

Researchers at the University of Freiburg in Germany used EEG to study
the brain of a former Buddhist monk who described this as a “clear,
aware openness.”

They found that content-free awareness was associated with a sharp fall
in alpha waves and an increase in theta waves.

There was also a decoupling of the activity of the sensory cortex and
dorsal attention network, but strong activity within the attention
network itself. Meanwhile, there was a decline in the activity of the
default mode network.

Prof. Graziano said content-free awareness in meditation may correspond
to the predictive model of attention described in his theory.

He told MNT:

  “I think the model of attention, representing the property of
  attention itself, is possible to construct in isolation, unassociated
  with a thing to which you are attending. It may indeed be the
  content-free awareness that meditators talk about. I do think that
  meditation is essentially practice in using your attention schema.”

Even without thoughts, sensations, or feelings, it seems the mysterious
essence of conscious awareness remains.

-   Neurology / Neuroscience
-   Psychology / Psychiatry
-   Sleep / Sleep Disorders / Insomnia

Share this article

[]

Written by James Kingsland on January 21, 2023 — Fact checked by Harriet
Pike, Ph.D.

Latest news

-   
    Is drinking coffee only in the morning better for your heart?
-   
    Vegan vs. vegetarian vs. omnivore: Does diet type have a big impact
    on gut health?
-   
    Is Alzheimer's linked to the cold-sore-causing herpes virus?
-   
    Sugary drinks may be driving millions of diabetes and heart disease
    cases
-   
    Cells all over the body store 'memories': What does this mean for
    health?

Related Coverage

-   

    The science behind lucid dreaming
    This special feature explores the science behind lucid dreaming, an
    experience in which a person realizes they are dreaming as they
    continue to dream.

    READ MORE

-   

-   

    Age-related memory loss: Can we prevent or even reverse it?
    This Special Feature looks at age-related memory loss. What is
    normal, and what might be a sign of dementia? And can we ever
    reverse memory loss?

    READ MORE

-   

    Can scientists 'hack' memory?
    Is it possible to manipulate memory formation and consolidation? And
    why would we want to do it? We explore these questions in this
    Spotlight feature.

    READ MORE

-   

    Déjà vu: Re-experiencing the unexperienced
    Here, we explore the common phenomenon of déjà vu: that odd sense
    that something wholly unfamiliar is, for a fleeting moment,
    strangely familiar.

    READ MORE

-   

    What to know about absence of the septum pellucidum (ASP)

    Medically reviewed by Seunggu Han, M.D.

    Absence of the septum pellucidum (ASP) is a rare condition where the
    membrane in the middle of the brain is missing. Read more.

    READ MORE

-   About Us
-   Contact Us
-   Terms of Use
-   Privacy Policy
-   Privacy Settings
-   Advertising Policy

-   Health Topics

-   Health Hubs

-   Medical Affairs

-   Content Integrity

-   Newsletters

-   © 2025 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved.
    MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline
    Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on
    this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical
    advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a
    healthcare professional. See additional information.

© 2025 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT
is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an
RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is
not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should
not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
See additional information.

[]

AboutCareersAdvertise with us

OUR BRANDS

HealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzy

[]
