[Encyclopedia Britannica]

Search Britannica

Click here to search

[Encyclopedia Britannica]

Search Britannica

Click here to search

SUBSCRIBE

SUBSCRIBE

Login

https://premium.britannica.com/premium-membership/?utm_source=premium&utm_medium=nav-login-box&utm_campaign=evergreen

Subscribe  Now

-   Home
-   History & Society
-   Science & Tech
-   Biographies
-   Animals & Nature
-   Geography & Travel
-   Arts & Culture
-   ProCon
-   Money

-   Games & Quizzes
-   Videos
-   On This Day
-   One Good Fact
-   Dictionary
-   New Articles

History & Society

-   Lifestyles & Social Issues
-   Philosophy & Religion
-   Politics, Law & Government
-   World History

Science & Tech

-   Health & Medicine
-   Science
-   Technology

Biographies

-   Browse Biographies

Animals & Nature

-   Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates
-   Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates
-   Environment
-   Fossils & Geologic Time
-   Mammals
-   Plants

Geography & Travel

-   Geography & Travel

Arts & Culture

-   Entertainment & Pop Culture
-   Literature
-   Sports & Recreation
-   Visual Arts

-   Companions
-   Demystified
-   Image Galleries
-   Lists
-   Podcasts
-   Spotlight
-   Summaries
-   The Forum
-   Top Questions
-   #WTFact

-   Britannica Kids

Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech
Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon
Money Videos

class consciousness

Table of Contents

Introduction References & Edit History Related Topics

Read Next

[Picking cotton on a Georgia plantation, 1858. Illustration published in
Ballou's Pictorial, v. 14, 1858, p. 49. African Americans; Black
Americans; cotton pickers; slavery; slaves; enslavement; Georgia]

Pro and Con: Reparations for Slavery

[John F. Kennedy as a boy with his family]

What Did We Call America’s Elite Before the “1 Percent”?

[Painting titled: "Washington as Statesman at the Constitutional
Convention" oil on canvas by Junius Brutus Stearns, 1856; in the
Virginia Museum of Fine Arts. (Note from museum) The painting represents
George Washington's role as president of the 1787 Constitutional
Convention in Philadelphia. The normally reserved Washington urges
passage of a new federal constitution, a draft of which he holds in his
hands.]

How Many of the Signers of the U.S. Constitution Were Enslavers?

Discover

[Orange basketball on black background and with low key lighting.
Homepage 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society]

The 10 Greatest Basketball Players of All Time

[Town of Sisimiut located on the coast of the Davis Strait on
Kangerluarsunnguaq Bay, Greenland]

The Largest Islands in the World

[Close up of books. Stack of books, pile of books, literature, reading.
Homepage 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society]

12 Novels Considered the “Greatest Book Ever Written”

[Government officials are erasing graffiti of Islamic State (ISIS)
banner in Solo, Java, Indonesia.]

Is It ISIS or ISIL?

[A Factory Interior, watercolor, pen and gray ink, graphite, and white
goache on wove paper by unknown artist, c. 1871-91; in the Yale Center
for British Art. Industrial Revolution England]

Inventors and Inventions of the Industrial Revolution

[The Colosseum, Rome, Italy. Giant amphitheatre built in Rome under the
Flavian emperors. (ancient architecture; architectural ruins)]

New Seven Wonders of the World

[Statue of Nostradamus]

Nostradamus and His Prophecies

Contents

Lifestyles & Social Issues Sociology & Society

class consciousness

sociology

Ask the Chatbot a Question

More Actions

Print

Cite

verifiedCite

While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there
may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual
or other sources if you have any questions.

Select Citation Style

MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style

Copy Citation

Share

Share

Share to social media

Facebook X

URL

https://www.britannica.com/topic/class-consciousness

Feedback

Feedback

Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to
improve this article (requires login).

Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other

Your Feedback

Submit Feedback

Thank you for your feedback

Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to
revise the article.

External Websites

Ask the Chatbot a Question

Written by

André Munro

André Munro is a regular freelance contributor as well as a former
editor at Encyclopaedia Britannica. He holds a Ph.D. in Political
Science (Northwestern University) and has written numerous articles...

André Munro

Fact-checked by

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they
have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by
working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write
new content and verify and edit content received from contributors.

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Article History

Table of Contents

Table of Contents

Ask the Chatbot a Question

Key People:
    György Lukács

(Show more)

Related Topics:
    social class

(Show more)

See all related content

class consciousness, the self-understanding of members of a social
class. This modern sociological concept has its origins in, and is
closely associated with, Marxist theory.

Although Karl Marx himself did not articulate a theory of class
consciousness, he intimated the concept in his characterization of the
working class. According to Marx, workers first become conscious of
sharing common grievances against capitalists (thus forming a class “in
itself”) and eventually develop an awareness of themselves as forming a
social class opposed to the bourgeoisie (thus becoming a class “for
itself”), the proletariat. Class consciousness is a historical
phenomenon, born out of collective struggle. In this sense, Marx did not
approach class consciousness as a matter of pure ideality. Rejecting any
separation of theory and practice, he used the term “conscious human
practices” to emphasize the conjunction of subjectivity and objectivity
in history.

In his seminal study of class consciousness, the Hungarian Marxist
philosopher György Lukács stressed the need to distinguish between class
consciousness and the ideas or feelings actually held by the members of
a social class. An objective analysis of class consciousness, according
to Lukács, must take into account those thoughts and feelings but also
those that the members would have held were they able to acquire a true
picture of their situation and of society as a whole.

Because Marxism considers social classes to have objective identities
and interests, its conception of class consciousness includes the
possibility of its antithesis: false consciousness. Broadly defined,
false consciousness refers to a distorted understanding of one’s class
identity and interest. From the perspective of Marxism, it concerns
primarily the tension between the historical mission of the working
class (to destroy capitalism and realize the socialist revolution) and
its understanding thereof. The problem of false consciousness has
encouraged an elitist streak in Marxism.

Although false consciousness is an error, it is not baseless or purely
fictitious. It is itself historically determined. For Marx, capitalism
is in a perpetual and eventually fatal state of crisis. Capitalism
unleashes forces of production that come to undermine its own
sustainability. For example, capital accumulation leads to increasing
economic inequalities, which reduces the purchasing power of workers and
in turn diminishes profit. Lukács suggested that the bourgeoisie cannot
face that crisis, because to do so would require accepting the end of
the class structure and relinquishing their class privilege. In that
sense, the economic and political ideology of the bourgeoisie is a form
of false consciousness, but it is nonetheless objectively determined by
the historical position of that class.

After Marx, socialist thinkers diverged on the status of working-class
consciousness. Some were optimistic and considered the working class to
be naturally in tune with its class interest and spontaneously
revolutionary; others, like Lenin, argued that the working class did not
possess instinctual socialist tendencies and therefore needed to be
enlightened by a revolutionary vanguard.

In a seminal redefinition, the sociologist Michael Mann examined
different dimensions of class consciousness: class belonging and
identity, class antagonism, class totality (the idea that social classes
encompass the entirety of society), and the vision of a classless
society. Those dimensions not only are formal subcategories but
correspond to experiences that generate class awareness and class
solidarity. For instance, the experience of economic exploitation can
lead workers to recognize that they have a stake in each other’s
well-being, and from there they will develop class consciousness and
class solidarity. Mann’s focus was placed on consciousness itself and
thus departed to some extent from Marx’s attempt to embed consciousness
in social practices.

[]

Get Unlimited Access

Try Britannica Premium for free and discover more.

Subscribe

Despite its Marxist origin, the concept of class consciousness is not
necessarily predicated on a revolutionary view of history. The
sociologist Karl Mannheim, for instance, associated social classes with
distinct understandings of reality without presuming one to be more
valid than others. Mannheim believed that social class frames one’s
understanding of reality, whether one is a member of the working class
or part of the elite. The result is a more or less partial and distorted
understanding, necessarily skewed by interest. Mannheim thus identified
class consciousness with ideological alienation. Therefore, the solution
lies not in greater class solidarity but, on the contrary, in acquiring
a more-enlightened understanding by approaching reality from a
multiplicity of perspectives. It is important to note that Marx and
Mannheim did not consider all forms of knowledge to be equally affected
by class consciousness; they regarded mathematics and science to be free
of its influence.

The concept of class consciousness receded in public discourse with the
fall of communist regimes at the end of the 20th century. Nevertheless,
the idea continues to raise important sociological questions, such as
these: What is the relationship between economic condition and
subjectivity? What is the role of the intelligentsia in bringing about
political change? Are there collective forms of consciousness and, if
so, what is their political efficacy?

André Munro
