   Skip to main content

   Home
   (BUTTON) [search.svg]
     * Log in

     * Buy the Paper
     * Daily Alert
     * Support Us
     * Advertise
     * Shop
     * Contact

     * Britain
     * World
     * Features
     * Editorial
     * Culture
     * Sport
     *

LATEST EDITORIAL
       Editorial: Class politics is the answer to democratic crisis
     * BACK TO TOP

   Enter your keywords _______________
   Search

   Monday, March 6, 2023

Full Marx: What is false consciousness?

The MARX MEMORIAL LIBRARY takes a look at a concept key to understanding how
ruling-class ideology becomes the ‘common sense’ of ordinary people

   [logo_mark_neg.svg]
   ×

              This is the last article you can read this month

                    You can read more article this month

                    You can read more articles this month

                    Sorry your limit is up for this month

                                  Reset on:

          Please help support the Morning Star by subscribing here

   FALSE consciousness is a term used to describe the way in which
   exploited, oppressed or disadvantaged groups in society accept,
   assimilate and indeed actively defend or promote ideas which ultimately
   act against their own interests.

   It can apply to individuals, to the working class as a whole, or to
   sections of it. It is closely related to the idea of hegemony (see Q&A
   82) and to Marxist concepts of alienation, reification and fetishism
   (see Q&A 51).

   “False consciousness” often manifests itself as so-called “common
   sense”. Examples include the notion that capitalism, “private
   enterprise”, profit, “the market” is simply how things are. That those
   who have power or earn more do so because they are brighter or work
   harder than the rest of us; that differences in opportunity or in the
   social position of men and women are natural, determined by their
   genes; that the status quo is simply just “the way the world works” and
   can’t be changed.

   False consciousness is related to the ever changing economic and social
   base of capitalism. Marx and Engels declared:
   “The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas,
   ie the class which is the ruling material force of society, is at the
   same time its ruling intellectual force.

   “The class which has the means of material production at its disposal,
   has control at the same time over the means of mental production, so
   that thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means
   of mental production are subject to it. The ruling ideas are nothing
   more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships,
   the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas; hence of the
   relationships which make the one class the ruling one, therefore, the
   ideas of its dominance.”

   Marx and Engels argued that false consciousness applies particularly in
   regard to abstract ideas, such as property rights, “ie ideas which
   increasingly take on the form of universality. For each new class which
   puts itself in the place of one ruling before it, is compelled, merely
   in order to carry through its aim, to represent its interest as the
   common interest of all the members of society, that is, expressed in
   ideal form: it has to give its ideas the form of universality, and
   represent them as the only rational, universally valid ones”.

   The term “false consciousness” was first used by Engels who emphasised
   that it was not simply a passive absorption of ruling-class ideas and
   values, but involves an active acquiescence in adopting and developing
   those ideas: “a process accomplished by the so-called thinker
   consciously, indeed, but with a false consciousness”.  False
   consciousness was an aspect of ideology but, Engels declared, had been
   neglected by Marxists because of “the fatuous notion of the ideologists
   that because we deny an independent historical development to the
   various ideological spheres which play a part in history we also deny
   them any effect upon history.”

   Gramsci in the 1930s further developed the notion of false
   consciousness as part of the political superstructure, as a vehicle for
   delivering capitalist hegemony – the dominant but changing set of
   cultural and ideological norms which determine the boundaries of what
   can and cannot be said without inviting ridicule or antagonism and
   which helps the existing system to address its own contradictions,
   adapt and survive.

   False consciousness is in part a consequence of the hegemony of
   propaganda, of the institutions of the capitalist state including
   education and the media, which encourages, and for some individuals
   rewards, obedience, submission and conformity.

   But it manifests itself – and is reinforced – in multiple ways in
   everyday life. It expresses itself (for example) in commodity fetishism
   — the way relationships between people (workers and owners) are framed
   as relationships between things (money and products).

   Commodity fetishism obscures the fact that relations between people and
   products reflect relationships between people and that they can
   therefore be changed.

   False consciousness reveals itself above all in conformity – how the
   need to keep a job to pay the rent or mortgage, feed the kids, heat the
   home, enjoy the occasional luxury becomes seen as normal, the natural
   state of affairs whilst those who reap the rewards of your labour are
   simply enjoying the rights of ownership.

   Ultimately, false consciousness legitimates the power of the ruling
   class.

   Marx and Engels declared “in the last analysis, the dominant ideas of a
   society are the ideas of its ruling class” – legitimating a situation
   in which one class has power. As Terry Eagleton puts it, ideology is
   “an element in that complex structure of social perception which
   ensures that the situation in which one social class has power over the
   others is either seen by most members of the society as ‘natural’, or
   not seen at all.”

   But (especially in its cultural aspects) “ideology is never a simple
   reflection of a ruling class’s ideas: on the contrary, it is always a
   complex phenomenon, which may incorporate conflicting, even
   contradictory, views of the world.”

   Engels for example declared that art is far richer and more
   “opaque” than political and economic theory because it is less
   explicit, less purely ideological. So challenging false consciousness
   is not (just) a matter of political education and social argument. As
   the excellent culture pages in this paper show, the battle is also
   important in the cultural sphere.

   The literary critic Ernst Fischer declared that art can (and that good
   art always does) transcend the ideological limits of its time “yielding
   us insights into the realities”.

   False consciousness is the antithesis of class consciousness, of the
   development of a “class for itself”. Class consciousness involves
   forging a counter-culture which sees beyond the limitations of
   capitalism.

   That task is vital where the contradictions of capitalism are most
   apparent – in the workplace, in our transport or energy supply systems,
   in the food chain, in the climate crisis.

   But it is critical also in neighbourhoods, in communities, in everyday
   life.

   In the decades following the collapse of “existing socialism” in the
   Soviet Union and subsequently elsewhere, not least (for example) in
   Yugoslavia (which had a very different model of social organisation and
   political engagement) some on the left experienced self-doubt.

   Some even conceived that capitalism represented “the end of history” –
   that self-interest and exploitation was the inevitable state of
   humanity.

   But socialism survived – and survives – not least in Cuba, in perhaps
   the least propitious of circumstances, due to the consciousness and
   engagement of workers and communities in protecting the gains of their
   revolution. And socialist ideas continue to inspire struggles for
   social justice and progress throughout the world.

   In Britain, too, resistance to capitalism’s escalating economic crisis
   and public support for struggles over jobs, pay, conditions, and the
   social wage reflects a growing understanding that things can and must
   change.

   Central to Marx’s concept of historical materialism is the
   understanding that it is not consciousness that determines people’s
   existence, but their social existence that determines their
   consciousness.

   However the form that consciousness takes can vary. As Gawain Little
   pointed out in an article in this paper, the hegemony exercised by
   capital is in a constant process of being remade and reconfigured.

   As he argued, “It is not enough to propose alternatives, or even to
   fight to win people to them. We must change the very ‘common sense’ of
   society, enabling people to envision a future beyond capitalism.”

   That is probably the single biggest challenge facing all socialists
   today.

   The annual Oration at Karl Marx’s grave at London’s Highgate Cemetery
   will take place on Sunday March 12; details and links to previous Full
   Marx Q&A (this is number 93) on the Marx Memorial Library’s website,
   www.marx-memorial-library.org.uk.

   Material challenging false consciousness in culture and the arts
   including a series of short films on art, literature, sport, religion
   and the media, made with the support of the Communication Workers
   Union, can be found on the Culture Matters website
   www.culturematters.org.uk.

Others liked

   Thursday 02nd Jan 2025
   Labour's plans to sell GP data to private sector ‘make no sense’
   Thursday 02nd Jan 2025
   Editorial: Class politics is the answer to democratic crisis
   Thursday 02nd Jan 2025
   Evidence suggests 77-year-old climate activist was recalled to prison
   over ‘fabricated reports’, family say
   Wednesday 01st Jan 2025
   In 2025, we must confront a dystopian right fighting for unchecked
   corporate power
   Friday 03rd Jan 2025
   What a surprise – Starmer’s a dud
   Buy Shares

   You can’t buy a revolution, but you can help the only daily paper in
   Britain that’s fighting for one by become a member of the People’s
   Printing Press Society.

   The Morning Star is a readers’ co-operative, which means you can become
   an owner of the paper too by buying shares in the society.

   Shares are £10 each — though unlike capitalist firms, each shareholder
   has an equal say. Money from shares contributes directly to keep our
   paper thriving.

   Some union branches have taken out shares of over £500 and individuals
   over £100.
   Buy here »
   Donate to the Fighting Fund

   You can’t buy a revolution, but you can help the only daily paper in
   Britain that’s fighting for one by donating to the Fighting Fund.

   The Morning Star is unique, as a lone socialist voice in a sea of
   corporate media. We offer a platform for those who would otherwise
   never be listened to, coverage of stories that would otherwise be
   buried.

   The rich don’t like us, and they don’t advertise with us, so we rely on
   you, our readers and friends. With a regular donation to our monthly
   Fighting Fund, we can continue to thumb our noses at the fat cats and
   tell truth to power.

   Donate today and make a regular contribution.
   Donate here »

Labour's plans to sell GP data to private sector ‘make no sense’

Campaigners warn Labour's ‘pro-business approach to data’ has ‘potential for
further loss of public trust’ in the NHS

   Editorial | Thursday 02nd Jan 2025

Editorial: Class politics is the answer to democratic crisis

   Britain | Thursday 02nd Jan 2025

Government urged to reverse border crackdown after 2024 revealed as deadliest
year for Channel crossings

   World | Thursday 02nd Jan 2025

International Federation of the Red Cross calls on Israel to allow its teams
into Gaza as seventh newborn freezes to death

In 2025, we must confront a dystopian right fighting for unchecked corporate
power

   Features
   Morning Star editor BEN CHACKO says the status quo cannot last – but
   those currently poised to replace it would usher in a nightmarish new
   era

Latest stories

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

Scottish government has spent £1.2bn mitigating Westminster's 14 years of
austerity, figures show

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

Thrillers: Christmas fluff vs Polish noir

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

Maher named on bench ahead of Bristol Bears debut

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

K-pop hits become anthems of South Korea’s protests against President Yoon

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

Just Stop Oil campaigner slams restrictions on protesters' right to explain
their actions

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

Campaigners demand First Minister steps up efforts to expand spread of Welsh
language

   Friday 03rd Jan 2025

Princes Food workers to walk out at five factories after bosses renege on pay
deal

Others liked

   Britain | Thursday 02nd Jan 2025

Labour's plans to sell GP data to private sector ‘make no sense’

   Editorial | Thursday 02nd Jan 2025

Editorial: Class politics is the answer to democratic crisis

   Britain | Thursday 02nd Jan 2025

Evidence suggests 77-year-old climate activist was recalled to prison over
‘fabricated reports’, family say

   Features | Wednesday 01st Jan 2025

In 2025, we must confront a dystopian right fighting for unchecked corporate
power

   [logo.svg]

OWNED BY OUR READERS

   We're a reader-owned co-operative, which means you can become part of
   the paper too by buying shares in the People’s Press Printing Society.



   Become a supporter
   [ff-logo.png]

Fighting fund

   You've Raised:£ 14,536
   We need:£ 3,646
   1 Days remaining
   Donate today
   Tweets by Morning Star

     * Britain
     * World
     * Features
     * Editorial
     * Culture
     * Sport
     *

LATEST EDITORIAL
       Editorial: Class politics is the answer to democratic crisis
     * BACK TO TOP

   [logo_mark.svg]

Owned by Our Readers

   We're a reader-owned co-operative, which means you can become part of
   the paper too by buying shares in the People’s Press Printing Society.
   BECOME A SUPPORTER
     * Privacy policy
     * Returns policy
     * Terms of use
