   #A Level Philosophy & Religious Studies » Feed A Level Philosophy &
   Religious Studies » Comments Feed JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

   Skip to content

   A Level Philosophy & Religious Studies

   (BUTTON) Menu
     * AQA Philosophy
     * OCR RS
     * Edexcel RS
     * AQA RS
     * Eduqas RS
     * Tutoring & essay marking

Conscience

   OCR
   Ethics

Religious views on conscience

Aquinas’ Natural moral law

   Aquinas developed Natural law as a form of religious ethics. Natural
   law is the theory that God has designed a moral law into human nature
   such that we are naturally inclined to certain moral behaviours. Ethics
   is therefore about using reason to discover the natural law within our
   nature so that we can conform our actions to it in order to fulfil our
   purpose (telos) of glorifying God, by following his law.

The Primary Precepts & Synderesis

   Aquinas claims that reason is a power of the human soul and synderesis
   is the habit or ability of reason to discover foundational ‘first
   principles’ of God’s natural moral law which gives us insight into
   God’s intentions for human life and thus our telos.

   “the first practical principles … [belong to] a special natural habit …
   which we call “synderesis” … is said to incite to good, and to murmur
   at evil, inasmuch as through first principles we proceed to discover,
   and judge of what we have discovered.”

   The first principle synderesis tells us is called the synderesis rule:
   that the good is what all things seek as their end/goal (telos). This
   means that human nature has an innate orientation to the good.

   “This therefore is the principle of law: that good must be done and
   evil avoided.”

   In addition to this, synderesis tells us the primary precepts: worship
   God, live in an orderly society, reproduce, educate, protect and
   preserve human life and defend the innocent. These primary precepts are
   the articulation of the orientations in our nature toward the good; the
   natural inclinations of our God-designed human nature, put into the
   form of ethical principles by human reason.

Secondary precepts & conscientia

   The primary precepts are applied to situations or types of actions – a
   process called conscientia. The judgement we then acquire is a
   secondary precept. E.g euthanasia: the primary precepts don’t say
   anything about euthanasia exactly, but we can use our reason to apply
   the primary precepts to euthanasia, and realise that it goes against
   the primary precept of protecting and preserving human life. Arguably
   it even disrupts the functioning of society too. Therefore, we can
   conclude the secondary precept that euthanasia is wrong.

Aquinas’ view of the conscience

   Natural law is Aquinas’ theory on how God is the grounding and source
   of morality. Conscience is about the human psychology involved in
   understanding and applying natural moral law. Conscience is ratio
   (reason) used to understand and apply God’s natural law.

   Aquinas claims that the classic features of conscience follow from the
   application of our knowledge of the natural moral law to our moral
   actions, in three ways:
    1. Witness – by knowing whether we have done or not done something.
    2. Bind & incite – “through the conscience we judge that something
       should be done or not done”
    3. Accuse, torment & rebuke – “by conscience we judge that something
       done is well done or ill done”

   This is how the conscience causes guilt. Conscience is our ability to
   know whether we have done something, whether we should have done it,
   and whether it was done well. If we have done something wrong, our
   conscience will accuse, torment and rebuke us – causing feelings of
   guilt.

   Because human reason is fallible, the conscience thereby becomes
   fallible. We could be mistaken for example when we don’t know how a
   general rule applies to a certain situation (mistake in conscientia).
   Aquinas claims that the synderesis rule and the primary precepts cannot
   be mistaken or lost from the human mind. However, mistakes can be made
   in conscientia – the application of the primary precepts to moral
   situations or actions to derive secondary precepts. These mistakes can
   result from original sin, unvirtuous habits and corrupt culture.

   “As to those general principles, the natural law, in the abstract, can
   nowise be blotted out from men’s hearts. […] But as to […] the
   secondary precepts, the natural law can be blotted out from the human
   heart, either by evil persuasions, just as in speculative matters
   errors occur in respect of necessary conclusions; or by vicious customs
   and corrupt habits”

   Real vs apparent goods. We might reason that something is in accord
   with our nature’s goal and is thus good, when really is not. Such
   actions are called apparent goods because they only appear good to
   someone engaged in faulty reasoning. They are not real goods. Despite
   this potential for our conscience judging something bad to be good,
   Aquinas still insists we must follow it:

   “Every judgment of conscience, be it right or wrong … is obligatory …
   he who acts against his conscience always sins”

   This is because if you choose to act against your conscience, then you
   are choosing to do something you believe to be evil. Conscience is thus
   always ‘binding’.

Vincible vs invincible ignorance

   Whether errors in conscience that lead to sinful acts will be forgiven
   or pardoned depends on the type of ignorance that caused the error.

   Invincible ignorance involves circumstances where a person could not
   have known better and so are not to blame for their action. For example
   if someone drunkenly jumps in front of your car and there was nothing
   you could have done, you would not be held responsible for hitting
   them. Actions that go against the natural law but are done due to
   invincible ignorance are technically not voluntary and thus not sin.

   “It is not imputed as a sin to man, if he fails to know what he is
   unable to know. Consequently ignorance of such like things is called
   ‘invincible’”

   Vincible ignorance involves circumstances where a person could have
   known better and so are to blame for their action. It typically
   involves some kind of negligence or ignorance of which moral principle
   is relevant to a situation. For example, if a fire breaks out in a
   building because it wasn’t looked after properly, then the person in
   charge of that is to blame for their action. They were ignorant that
   the fire would happen, but they should have known better. Actions that
   go against the natural law done out of vincible ignorance are sins
   because we should have known better.

   “[invincible ignorance] not being voluntary, since it is not in our
   power to be rid of it, is not a sin … On the other hand, vincible
   ignorance is a sin, if it be about matters one is bound to know.”

   Arguably Aquinas is too optimistic about human nature. If you consider
   the terrible things that humans have done and that entire cultures have
   embraced, e.g. slavery and Nazism, it starts to look like human nature
   is not as positive as Aquinas thought. If we really had an orientation
   towards the good and the primary precepts accurately described our
   nature’s orientation, then we should not expect to find the extent of
   human evil we do.

   However, Aquinas’ claim is merely that human nature contains an
   orientation towards the good, it doesn’t involve a commitment to humans
   actually doing more good than evil, nor to incredibly evil acts or
   cultures occurring infrequently. Aquinas acknowledges that there are
   many reasons we might fail to do good despite having an orientation
   towards it. These include original sin, mistakes in conscientia,
   lacking virtue and a corrupt culture.

   The fact that humanity could sink so low as to produce Nazism and the
   holocaust is strong evidence against the human nature having an
   orientation toward the good.

Descriptive moral relativism

   Aquinas was not as aware of different cultures as we are today. As we
   now know thanks to modern anthropology, there are vastly different
   moral beliefs across cultures; this is called descriptive moral
   relativism. Fletcher made the argument that this could be taken as
   evidence that there is not an innate God-given ability of reason to
   discover the natural law, since then we should expect more moral
   agreement. Freud would argue that it is society which conditions our
   moral views. There either is no natural moral law or human reason is
   unable to discover it. So, what Aquinas thought was human nature was
   really just his culture.

   However, there do seem to be some core similarities between the
   moralities of different cultures such as not killing for no reason and
   rules about stealing. Reproduction and education are also universal.
   Moral thinkers from different cultures came up with similar moral
   prescriptions such as the golden rule; to treat others as you would
   like to be treated, which can be found in ancient Chinese Philosophy,
   Hinduism, Judaism and Christianity. This could be taken to show that
   moral views are determined by a universal human moral nature.

   Alternative explanation: These cross-cultural similarities in moral
   codes might have resulted from a biologically evolved morality rather
   than one designed by a God, however, which would mean it is not related
   to a telos designed by God.

   Alternatively, cross-cultural morality might result merely from the
   basic requirement of a society to function. If anyone could kill or
   steal from anyone else for no reason whenever they wanted, it’s hard to
   see how a society could exist. That might create an existential
   pressure which influences the moral thinkers of a society, yielding
   prescriptions such as the golden rule. Cross-cultural ethics therefore
   has a practical reality as its basis, not God and not or not only
   evolution.

Aquinas’ Natural Theology

   Aquinas believed that human reason could never know or understand God.
   However, Aquinas is a proponent of natural theology through reason
   which he claimed could support faith in God. Human reason can gain
   knowledge of God’s natural moral law through the ability of human
   reason to know the synderesis rule and primary precepts.

   Karl Barth argued that Aquinas’ natural law theory was a false natural
   theology which placed a dangerous overreliance on human reason. Barth
   argued that if humans were able to know God or God’s morality through
   their own efforts, then revelation would be unnecessary. Yet, God
   clearly thought revelation necessary as he sent Jesus.

   Barth also argued that “the finite has no capacity for the infinite”;
   our finite minds cannot grasp God’s infinite being. Whatever humans
   discover through reason is therefore not divine so to think it is must
   then amount to idolatry – the worship of earthly things. Barth argued
   idolatry can lead to worship of nations and then even to movements like
   the Nazis. It follows for Barth that after the corruption of the fall,
   human reason cannot reach God or figure out right and wrong by itself.
   Only faith in God’s revelation in the bible is valid.

   In defence of Aquinas, he is not suggesting that our finite minds can
   understand God’s nature or goodness (eternal law). Aquinas is only
   suggesting that reason can understand the natural law God created
   within our nature. If reason only has this goal of supporting faith in
   such ways, then it cannot make revealed theology unnecessary.

    Tillich defends Aquinas to a degree, arguing that Barth was too
   negative in denying the possibility of reason discovering anything
   whatsoever of the natural law.

   “there is self-deception in every denial of the natural moral law … The
   very statement that man is estranged from his created nature
   presupposes an experience of the abyss between what he essentially is
   and what is existentially is. Even a weak or misled conscience is still
   a conscience, namely, the silent voice of man’s own essential nature,
   judging his actual being” – Tillich.

   To deny that our conscience can discover the natural law is to claim
   that there is a gap between what we currently are and what we could be.
   Yet, to have an awareness of that gap is to have a conscience that is
   aware of its fallen state. So it is contradictory to deny the natural
   law. Even it now involves a weakened conscience, that still tells us at
   least something of the direction we have fallen in and the direction
   back towards righteousness.

   However, whatever a weak and misled conscience discovers is surely not
   God’s morality. Humanity believing it has the ability to know anything
   of God is the same arrogance that caused Adam and Eve to disobey God.
   Humanity believing that it has the power to figure out right and wrong
   is what led to the arrogant certainty of the Nazis in their own
   superiority. The arrogance of natural theology is evidence of a human
   inability to be humble enough to simply have faith.

Psychological views on the conscience

Sigmund Freud

   Freud thought the conscience was just the result of psychological
   forces that science could understand. Freud believed the mind was
   divided into the Id (our unconscious animalistic desires), Ego (Our
   conscious decision-making self) and the Super Ego (the part of us that
   “stores” the values we introjected ((unconsciously adopted)) from
   authority figures during childhood and is the source of our moral
   feelings). When a desire bubbles up from the unconscious Id into our
   conscious Ego, we become aware of wanting to act on it, but our Super
   Ego then tells us whether the values of our society allow it. If so, we
   can act on it. If not, we have been conditioned to repress that desire,
   which Freud thought responsible for many mental problems.

   The ethical implications is that conscience is not the voice of God in
   us, it is just what our society wants from us. Our society might be
   good or bad, therefore our conscience is not the best guide if Freud is
   right. Furthermore there might not even be a ‘good or bad’, if morality
   is merely the conditioning of societies on its members.

   Freud was influenced by Nietzsche who argued that human conscious mind
   (what Freud called the ego) developed by necessity when humans
   underwent the radical change from hunter-gatherer to farmer. Our
   natural animalistic instincts (What Freud called the Id) were of less
   use to us in the new environment of society, in fact they were a
   hinderance as they called on us to behave in ways that would make
   society fall apart. Consciousness emerged as the space in-between our
   instincts and the outside world as a mediator which had to decide which
   instincts to act on and which not to.

   Freud’s theory of psychosexual development relates to his theory of the
   id, ego and superego. Freud thought that the process of being
   socialised – being inducted into society – required children to learn
   to control their Id. This process of learning was developmental in that
   it comes in stages. If self-control is not learned at a particular
   stage, it can lead to issues later in life.

   Oral stage: Between birth and 1.5 years old. Babies breastfeed, and
   explore the world by putting things in their mouth. Failure to develop
   properly during this stage can lead to smoking or overeating.

   Anal stage: 1.5 – 3 years old. The ego develops at this time and
   pleasure is gained through exercising self-control over going to the
   toilet. Those who overly-control become a control freak, those who do
   not learn to control enough become messy.

   Phallic stage: 3-6 years old. Children become aware of their genitals
   and their gender. Oedipus and Electra complex develops – jealousy of
   the parent of the same sex for the time and attention they take from
   the parent of opposite same sex. Problems moving through this stage
   cause intimacy issues later in life.

   Latency stage: 6-puberty. Sexual desire develops and is repressed.
   Gender roles are learned.

   Mature genital stage: lasts until death. Controlled sexual desires
   result in a desire for love and marriage. A person now has a fully
   developed conscience where the ego controls the Id with reference to
   the superego.

   Freud has been criticised by contemporary psychologists for not being
   empirical enough. Karl Popper criticised Freud’s theory for being
   ‘unfalsifiable’ as it could not say what would prove it wrong. This
   means it is not true empiricism. Freud studied a small sample size of
   patients, a poor cross-section of society and did not do proper
   experiments, so he is unscientific. However, Popper was clear that he
   wasn’t saying there was absolutely nothing of value in Freud’s ideas –
   just that they needed to be subjected to proper scientific experiment
   and testing.

   Piaget was a contemporary psychologist who developed better empirical
   methods of experiment than Freud but came to similar conclusions, so
   can thus be seen to defend Freud to some degree from the accusation of
   being unscientific. He studied the development of children and argued
   that there occurs a fundamental shift in the nature of ‘conscience’.
   Before the age of 11 children have what he called heteronomous
   morality. This means they merely associate actions as bad because of
   the influence of their authority figures like parents. For example, an
   8 year old child dangerously runs into a road and their parent yells at
   them. The child will learn not to do that again, but not because they
   have cognitively understood that running into the road will cause them
   injury or death which would be a bad thing, but because they merely
   associate the action of running into the road with the loud scary noise
   of their parents shouting occurring. After 11 year old however, Piaget
   argued that the autonomous morality develops in children, where they
   can begin to have abstract cognitive moral beliefs about how one ought
   to act and why.

Freud’s critique of religion’s approach to developing the conscience

   Maintaining social order depends on people repressing their anti-social
   instincts (e.g. for sex and violence). Religion encourages repression
   and for that Freud thought it had done “great services for human
   civilization” in the “taming of the asocial instincts”. Nonetheless,
   Freud thought that the Christian belief system had long passed its
   usefulness because a secular society would be far superior at enabling
   self-control. So, society would be better off outgrowing religion.

   Freud evaluates religion and its doctrines not as claims about reality
   but as strategies for controlling instincts. For example, for Freud,
   belief in and propagation of the idea that human nature is corrupted by
   original sin is really just a method of dealing with our natural
   instincts, but a primitive and childish method that actually causes as
   much immorality and unhappiness as it prevents. Viewing humanity as
   inherently sinful and only God as good, who easily forgives sins, does
   not provide the proper motivation for following religious social rules,
   causing frequent “backslidings into sin” and seeking of penance.

   After millennia of religious rule, too many people are still unhappy
   being controlled by social rules. Freud claims this is because the
   religious approach to conscience is external imposition by authority,
   similar to how children are treated, the result being comparable to a
   ‘childhood neurosis’. Although rules are in place to reduce suffering,
   they also cause suffering through repression and thus inspire
   unconscious resentment against civilisation.

   Freud argues that the better approach for society would be autonomy.
   People can rationally understand that repressing their instincts is for
   the good of social order, making them capable of choosing autonomously
   to follow social rules. This makes them more likely to happily accept
   and follow them. Furthermore, this would also introduce flexibility
   into the rules. If it were accepted that the social rules of human
   origin with the intention of improving society, then they could be
   continually improved, further encouraging adherence to them.

   Ultimately, the effectiveness of religious rules as tools for social
   order depends on the notion that a God has decreed them, which
   inexorably burdens religious social order with the psychology of
   external imposition and the inflexibility of eternal unchanging ‘laws
   of God’. Freud concludes that society would be much better off if it
   could admit that the purpose of its social rules is the maintenance of
   social order, rather than their “pretended sanctity”.

   Aquinas’ natural law ethics arguably gets around Freud’s critique,
   because Aquinas thought that following of the natural law did involve
   the engagement of a person’s rationality with God’s eternal law in a
   way that enabled their virtue and flourishing. It’s not simply
   externally imposed and there is a degree of flexibility in the
   application of the primary precepts and use of the double effect.

   Perhaps Freud’s critique only really works against approaches to the
   conscience like Augustine’s where it simply involves an external
   imposition of God’s law.

Possible exam questions for Conscience

   Easy
   Critically compare Aquinas and Freud’s view of the conscience
   Are the workings of God present in the conscience?

   Medium
   ‘Freud makes more sense of the concept of guilt than Aquinas’ –
   Discuss.
   Does a theological approach to conscience work better than a
   psychological approach?
   Critically compare Aquinas and Freud’s views on the process of moral
   decision-making.

   Hard
   Does conscience exist at all or is it an umbrella term for culture,
   environment, genetics and education?
   Is conscience merely an umbrella term for the psychological factors
   involved in moral decision making?
   Critically assess Freud’s psychosexual approach.
     __________________________________________________________________

Quick links

   Year 12 ethics topics:
   Natural Law. Situation ethics. Kantian ethics. Utilitarianism.
   Euthanasia. Business ethics.

   Year 13 ethics topics:
   Meta-ethics. Conscience. Sexual ethics.

   OCR Philosophy
   OCR Christianity
   OCR essay structure
   OCR list of possible exam questions

   © Joe Livingstone 2017-2024. All rights reserved.

   Tweets by Philosophy_rs
