Skip to main content

Scientific American[]

[]

September 25, 2023

8 min read

Is Consciousness Part of the Fabric of the Universe?

A theory called panpsychism proposes that consciousness is a fundamental
aspect of reality

By Dan Falk edited by Clara Moskowitz

[Illustration showing a silhouette of child's head with blue and white
abstract swirls shown against a dark background.]

Fanatic Studio/Gary Waters/Getty Images

More than 400 years ago, Galileo showed that many everyday
phenomena—such as a ball rolling down an incline or a chandelier gently
swinging from a church ceiling—obey precise mathematical laws. For this
insight, he is often hailed as the founder of modern science. But
Galileo recognized that not everything was amenable to a quantitative
approach. Such things as colors, tastes and smells “are no more than
mere names,” Galileo declared, for “they reside only in consciousness.”
These qualities aren’t really out there in the world, he asserted, but
exist only in the minds of creatures that perceive them. “Hence if the
living creature were removed,” he wrote, “all these qualities would be
wiped away and annihilated.”

Since Galileo’s time the physical sciences have leaped forward,
explaining the workings of the tiniest quarks to the largest galaxy
clusters. But explaining things that reside “only in consciousness”—the
red of a sunset, say, or the bitter taste of a lemon—has proven far more
difficult. Neuroscientists have identified a number of neural correlates
of consciousness—brain states associated with specific mental states—but
have not explained how matter forms minds in the first place. As
philosopher Colin McGinn put it in a 1989 paper, “Somehow, we feel, the
water of the physical brain is turned into the wine of consciousness.”
Philosopher David Chalmers famously dubbed this quandary the “hard
problem” of consciousness.*

Scholars recently gathered to debate the problem at Marist College in
Poughkeepsie, N.Y., during a two-day workshop focused on an idea known
as panpsychism. The concept proposes that consciousness is a fundamental
aspect of reality, like mass or electrical charge. The idea goes back to
antiquity—Plato took it seriously—and has had some prominent supporters
over the years, including psychologist William James and philosopher and
mathematician Bertrand Russell. Lately it is seeing renewed interest,
especially following the 2019 publication of philosopher Philip Goff’s
book Galileo’s Error, which argues forcefully for the idea.

Goff, of the University of Durham in England, organized the recent event
along with Marist philosopher Andrei Buckareff, and it was funded
through a grant from the John Templeton Foundation. In a small lecture
hall with floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking the Hudson River, roughly
two dozen scholars probed the possibility that perhaps it’s
consciousness all the way down.

Part of the appeal of panpsychism is that it appears to provide a
workaround to the question posed by Chalmers: we no longer have to worry
about how inanimate matter forms minds because mindedness was there all
along, residing in the fabric of the universe. Chalmers himself has
embraced a form of panpsychism and even suggested that individual
particles might be somehow aware. He said in a TED Talk that a photon
“might have some element of raw, subjective feeling, some primitive
precursor to consciousness.” Also on board with the idea is
neuroscientist Christof Koch, who noted in his 2012 book Consciousness
that if one accepts consciousness as a real phenomenon that’s not
dependent on any particular material—that it’s “substrate-independent,”
as philosophers put it—then “it is a simple step to conclude that the
entire cosmos is suffused with sentience.”

Yet panpsychism runs counter to the majority view in both the physical
sciences and in philosophy that treats consciousness as an emergent
phenomenon, something that arises in certain complex systems, such as
human brains. In this view, individual neurons are not conscious, but
thanks to the collective properties of some 86 billion neurons and their
interactions—which, admittedly, are still only poorly understood—brains
(along with bodies, perhaps) are conscious. Surveys suggest that
slightly more than half of academic philosophers hold this view, known
as “physicalism” or “emergentism,” whereas about one third reject
physicalism and lean toward some alternative, of which panpsychism is
one of several possibilities.

At the workshop, Goff made the case that physics has missed something
essential when it comes to our inner mental life. In formulating their
theories, “most physicists think about experiments,” he said. “I think
they should be thinking, ‘Is my theory compatible with
consciousness?’—because we know that’s real.”

Many philosophers at the meeting appeared to share Goff’s concern that
physicalism falters when it comes to consciousness. “If you know every
last detail about my brain processes, you still wouldn’t know what it’s
like to be me,” says Hedda Hassel Mørch, a philosopher at Inland Norway
University of Applied Sciences. “There is a clear explanatory gap
between the physical and the mental.” Consider, for example, the
difficulty of trying to describe color to someone who has only seen the
world in black and white. Yanssel Garcia, a philosopher at the
University of Nebraska Omaha, believes that physical facts alone are
inadequate for such a task. “There is nothing of a physical sort that
you could provide [a person who sees only in shades of gray] in order to
have them understand what color experience is like; [they] would need to
experience it themselves,” he says. “Physical science is, in principle,
incapable of telling us the complete story.” Of the various alternatives
that have been put forward, he says that “panpsychism is our best bet.”

But panpsychism attracts many critics as well. Some point out that it
doesn’t explain how small bits of consciousness come together to form
more substantive conscious entities. Detractors say that this puzzle,
known as the “combination problem,” amounts to panpsychism’s own version
of the hard problem. The combination problem “is the serious challenge
for the panpsychist position,” Goff admits. “And it’s where most of our
energies are going.”

Others question panpsychism’s explanatory power. In his 2021 book Being
You, neuroscientist Anil Seth wrote that the main problems with
panpsychism are that “it doesn’t really explain anything and that it
doesn’t lead to testable hypotheses. It’s an easy get-out to the
apparent mystery posed by the hard problem.”

While most of those invited to the workshop were philosophers, there
were also talks by physicists Sean Carroll and Lee Smolin and by
cognitive psychologist Donald Hoffman. Carroll, a hardcore physicalist,
served as an unofficial leader of the opposition as the workshop
unfolded. (He occasionally quipped, “I’m surrounded by panpsychists!”)
During a well-attended public debate between Goff and Carroll, the
divergence of their worldviews quickly became apparent. Goff said that
physicalism has led “precisely nowhere,” and suggested that the very
idea of trying to explain consciousness in physical terms was
incoherent. Carroll argued that physicalism is actually doing quite well
and that although consciousness is one of many phenomena that can’t be
inferred from the goings-on at the microscopic level, it is nonetheless
a real, emergent feature of the macroscopic world. He offered the
physics of gases as a parallel example. At the micro level, one talks of
atoms, molecules and forces; at the macro level, one speaks of pressure,
volume and temperature. These are two kinds of explanations, depending
on the “level” being studied—but present no great mystery and are not a
failure on the part of physics. Before long, Goff and Carroll were deep
into the weeds of the so-called knowledge argument (also known as “Mary
in the black and white room”), as well as the “zombie” argument.
Both boil down to the same key question: Is there something about
consciousness that cannot be accounted for by physical facts alone? Much
of the rhetorical ping-pong between Goff and Carroll amounted to Goff
answering yes to that question and Carroll answering no.

Another objection some attendees raised is that panpsychism doesn’t
address what philosophers call the “other minds” problem. (You have
direct access to your own mind—but how can you deduce anything at all
about another person’s mind?) “Even if panpsychism is true, there will
still be vast amounts of things—namely, things related to what the
experiences of others are like—that we still won’t know,” says Rebecca
Chan, a philosopher at San José State University. She worries that
invoking an underlying layer of mindedness is a bit like invoking God.
“I sometimes wonder if the panpsychist position is similar to ‘god of
the gaps’ arguments,” she says, referring to the notion that God is
needed to fill the gaps in scientific knowledge.

Other ideas were batted around. The idea of cosmopsychism was
floated—roughly, the notion that the universe itself is conscious. And
Paul Draper, a philosopher at Purdue University who participated via
Zoom, talked about a subtly different idea known as “psychological ether
theory”—essentially that brains don’t produce consciousness but rather
make use of consciousness. In this view, consciousness was already there
before brains existed, like an all-pervasive ether. If the idea is
correct, he writes, “then (in all likelihood) God exists.”

Hoffman, a cognitive scientist at the University of California, Irvine,
who also addressed the workshop via Zoom, advocates rejecting the idea
of spacetime and looking for something deeper. (He cited the
increasingly popular idea in physics lately that space and time may not
be fundamental but may instead be emergent phenomena themselves.) The
deeper entity related to consciousness, Hoffman suggests, may consist of
“subjects and experiences” that he says “are entities beyond spacetime,
not within spacetime.” He developed this idea in a 2023 paper entitled
“Fusions of Consciousness.”

Smolin, a physicist at the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics
in Ontario, who also participated via Zoom, has similarly been working
on theories that appear to offer a more central role for conscious
agents. In a 2020 paper, he suggested that the universe “is composed of
a set of partial views of itself” and that “conscious perceptions are
aspects of some views”—a perspective that he says can be thought of as
“a restricted form of panpsychism.”

Carroll, speaking after the session that included both Hoffman and
Smolin, noted that his own views diverged from those of the speakers
within the first couple of minutes. (Over lunch, he noted that attending
the workshop sometimes felt like being on a subreddit for fans of a TV
show that you’re just not into.) He admitted that endless debates over
the nature of “reality” sometimes left him frustrated. “People ask me,
‘What is physical reality?’ It’s physical reality! There’s nothing that
it ‘is.’ What do you want me to say, that it’s made of macaroni or
something?” (Even Carroll, however, admits that there’s more to reality
than meets the eye. He’s a strong supporter of the “many worlds”
interpretation of quantum mechanics, which holds that our universe is
just one facet of a vast quantum multiverse.)

If all of this sounds like it couldn’t possibly have any practical
value, Goff raised the possibility that how we conceive of minds can
have ethical implications. Take the question of whether fish feel pain.
Traditional science can only study a fish’s outward behavior, not its
mental state. To Goff, focusing on the fish’s behavior is not only
wrong-headed but “horrific” because it leaves out what’s actually most
important—what the fish actually feels. “We’re going to stop asking if
fish are conscious and just look at their behavior? Who gives a shit
about the behavior? I want to know if it has an inner life; that’s all
that matters!” For physicalists such as Carroll, however, feelings and
behavior are intimately linked—which means we can avoid causing an
animal to suffer by not putting it in a situation where it appears to be
suffering based on its behavior. “If there were no connection between
them [behavior and feelings], we would indeed be in trouble,” says
Carroll, “but that’s not our world.”

Seth, the neuroscientist, was not at the workshop—but I asked him where
he stands in the debate over physicalism and its various alternatives.
Physicalism, he says, still offers more “empirical grip” than its
competitors—and he laments what he sees as excessive hand-wringing over
its alleged failures, including the supposed hardness of the hard
problem. “Critiquing physicalism on the basis that it has ‘failed’ is
willful mischaracterization,” he says. “It’s doing just fine, as
progress in consciousness science readily attests.” In a recently
published article in the Journal of Consciousness Studies, Seth adds:
“Asserting that consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous does nothing
to shed light on the way an experience of blueness is the way it is, and
not some other way. Nor does it explain anything about the possible
functions of consciousness, nor why consciousness is lost in states such
as dreamless sleep, general anaesthesia, and coma.”

Even those who lean toward panpsychism sometimes seem hesitant to dive
into the deep end. As Garcia put it, in spite of the allure of a
universe imbued with consciousness, “I would love to be talked out of
it.”

*Editor’s Note (10/4/23): This paragraph was edited after posting to
correct the attribution of Colin McGinn’s statement about consciousness.

Rights & Permissions

Dan Falk is a science journalist based in Toronto. His books include The
Science of Shakespeare and In Search of Time. Follow him on X (formerly
Twitter) @danfalk and on Threads @danfalkscience

More by Dan Falk

Expand Your World with Science

Learn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas
shaping our world today.

SubscribeSign up for our newslettersSee the latest storiesRead the
latest issueGive a Gift Subscription

Follow Us:[][][][][]

[Scientific American publications in print & digital formats]

-   Return & Refund Policy
-   About
-   Press Room

-   FAQs
-   Contact Us
-   International Editions

-   Advertise
-   Accessibility Statement
-   Terms of Use

-   Privacy Policy
-   California Consumer Privacy Statement
-   Use of cookies/Do not sell my data

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has
commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of
them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American
maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting
developments in science to our readers.

© 2024 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
