[]

Coupon:

find-coupon

 

checkout

Bm | Narrating the discussion

-   Library
-   About us
-   Newsletter
-   Contact

Brandingmag

Brandingmag

open

-   Home
-   Library
    Read, listen, and watch thoughtfully crafted content from across the
    branding industry.

    -   Read
    -   Listen
    -   Watch

    Thought-provoking discussions and insights from brands and agencies.

    []

    Latest publications

    [State of the Brand: Nordic Equilibrium]
    Nordic Equilibrium
    State of the Brand #3

    [Creative Leaders Call for More Transparency – The Roundtable 40]
    Creative Leaders Call for More Transparency
    The Roundtable #40

    [Philips - Don’t Panic! No. 17]
    Thomas Marzano, Global Head of Brand at Philips
    Don’t Panic! No. 17

    See all
-   Threads
    Gain proven insights from the experience of pioneers, thought
    leaders, and innovators across the global branding world.

    -   Brandtech
    -   Content
    -   Creative
    -   Experience
    -   Marketing
    -   Metrics
    -   Strategy
    -   Sustainability

    77 ARTICLES

    Br

    Latest from: Brandtech

    [Humanity in Branding: Is AI Driving or Hindering Your Customers’
    Trust?]
    Humanity in Branding: Is AI Driving or Hindering Your Customers’
    Trust?

    [Is Your Business Asking the Right Questions About Generative AI?]
    Is Your Business Asking the Right Questions About Generative AI?

    [Enter the AI-powered Mascot Paradigm of Brand Personification]
    Enter the AI-powered Mascot Paradigm of Brand Personification

    See all
-   Editor’s pick
-   Podcast
-   Masterclasses
-   Contributors
-   Library
-   About Us
-   Newsletter
-   Contribute
-   Contact

-   facebook
-   twitter
-   youtube
-   linkedIn
-   Instagram

Social

perpetuwall

search-open

SEARCH

Sign in

close

perpetuwall

search-open

search-close

-   Cristian Saracco
-   9 Dec 2021

Everyone Has a Purpose, Few Have a Conscience

Sustainability

The Americas

7 min read

[Everyone Has a Purpose, Few Have a Conscience]

Purpose is the raison d’être of a company, the permanent basis of its
strategy. Every company has a purpose, explicit or not; however, few –
although this is changing – have a conscience. To be clear, the Mafia
has a purpose, but consciousness is just another story.

Let’s start with this Litmus test: “Who said this statement?”

To start off relaxed, I’d like to invite you to play and take part in
this riddle with three possible answers, although only one of them is
the right one.

The question is: Who has explicitly told this institutional purpose?

The purpose under scrutiny is:

“Caring for those around us, always ensuring their well-being and that
of their families, for a lifetime.

Protecting our environment, taking care of raw materials, giving
security to producers, recycling our waste.”

The potential answers are:

1.  Paulus “Paul” Gerardus Josephus Maria Polman, Former CEO of
    Unilever;
2.  Pope Francis, 266th Pope of the Catholic Church;
3.  Anthony “Tony” John Soprano Sr., Capo di tutti Capi – From The
    Sopranos crime drama TV series.

[]

Credit: CoWomen

Before giving the right answer, we must admit that all three could have
said that quote, one talking about the Unilever raison d’être, Pope
Francis in his second encyclical, Laudato si’, and we are left with Tony
Soprano whom you probably know, I guess.

And the correct choice is the number “3”. Words more or words least,
this was the way Tony Soprano described to his psychologist the business
he was in and leading.

By this, what I mean is that everyone has a purpose, even the Mafia, yet
few have a conscience and even fewer are specific in the way they define
it.

Consciousness needs sincerity rather than authenticity

For a company, being true to itself means being concerned, admitting
vulnerability, and making bold choices. For example, stopping
collaborating with other firms that do not meet a company’s standards of
conduct; assuming responsibility for mistakes that affect society;
abandoning businesses that are no longer legitimate. In other words,
being consistent between what the company thinks, does, and says.

Behaving truthfully and being unapologetically driven by values are two
of the essential characteristics that today’s society is demanding from
each institution.

SEE ALSO:A Better Future, Finale – Advertisers’ Total Commitment to
People and Communities

The key difference between being authentic and sincere is that a
business can be authentic and behave without a sense of morality or
ethics, while it is impossible to think of a sincere company behaving in
that way.

On the one hand, we all have examples of rude, unresponsive, and abusive
companies that are authentic but are seldom true to themselves and
conscious of others. On the other hand, sincerity is about recognizing
that the company lives in a world that goes beyond its own borders. It
is about deeply considering its impact on the planet, being
self-conscious, purposeful, and going beyond the numbers to confirm and
express its true nature. Being sincere means knowing that there is a
pathway to live and work by its values, down to every detail. In this
way, a company can become a genuine and inspiring brand.

[]

Tony Ryan, Ryan Air (Credit: Criptomonedas) & Yvon Chouinard, Patagonia
(Credit:  DUNA) | Authenticity and sincerity… Capisci?

Another important issue to consider is that authenticity is an innate
behavior and sincerity is an acquired one.

Babies are authentic, kids learn to behave sincerely. The same can
happen with companies.

Business authenticity is a broader definition that considers the entire
spectrum of being true to itself, while sincerity is more focused,
brings wisdom, care, and a greater perspective than its own.

People believe in honest brands

It is good business to be true to what the company is, allowing the
public to recognize how it behaves with a conscience. Although, in
addition, society demands a positive social and environmental impact
from the company, this does not mean that profit motives (which are
necessary) are hidden as a falsely sincere attitude.

It is valid to recognize the need to “make money” whilst being
sympathetic to the audience in the way a company communicates. That’s
sincerity!

Brands trying to navigate this new world of conscience and sincerity
should act differently, deeply believing in the way they think, in the
values they defend, doing the right thing, and being honest about their
motivations.

  “Behaving truthfully and being unapologetically driven by values are
  two of the essential characteristics that today’s society is demanding
  from each institution.”

If being honest and conscious brings on a deeper layer of seriousness
and respect, being conscious of others helps take it to the next level,
one that is increasingly demanded by all stakeholders including
citizens.

“Is your company radically honest? ” I asked him.
“Of course, it is! We’ve always been honest,” he lied to me.

Conscientious purpose is an inherent part of business

From the beginning of time, purpose is born with any enterprise
expressing its raison d’être – even Adam, Eve, Lilith, and the apple.

Thus, the purpose must be company-connected, and its fit is achieved
because the strategic aims are born from and aligned with such business.

SEE ALSO:How Brands Can Put Purpose at the Heart of Their Marketing
Strategy

The challenge for the leadership team is to first understand the real
and deepest meaning of purpose, translating it into an actionable
mission and vision. It is a matter of alignment, coherence, and
consistency.

These are the basis of a company’s better performance, not only in terms
of achieving better economic and financial results but also in
generating a positive impact.

A conscientious purpose must be integrated into all aspects of how
companies do business.

As life, purpose is understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.
This means that, if purpose changes, the company must change –
essentially, because it must be reimagined, redesigned, and restarted to
live a new aspirational future. This is a key point that is often
misunderstood.

Making a conscientious purpose explicit is a good first step

To be practical, a good first step is to make the purpose explicit and,
if it is already there, to ensure that it really is the reason for the
company’s existence and not a good narrative invented by the marketing
or communication areas.

“Holy Graf Zeppelin, Batman!” Unfortunately, we tend to produce such
conceptual monstrosities far too often. Deal with it! If the purpose of
the business is only to make money, that’s what it is! As mentioned
before, it can change but it will imply that a new business was born.

SEE ALSO:Good Enough Isn’t Good Enough

To reinforce, deepen, and, above all, be driven by a purpose, in
addition to making it explicit, companies must continuously translate it
into precise business objectives associated with it and, in turn, the
latter must be translated into visible actions and behaviors. This
ensures executive responsiveness to the company’s key audiences and
becomes the trigger for exceptional transformation and growth.

The obvious steps (sorry, but I must insist on this) to make purpose a
meaningful day-to-day experience are:

-   Think, act, and say – in that order;
-   Measure the impact of how the company acts on purpose;
-   Make the leadership team accountable;
-   Ensure that all stakeholders understand and share that company’s
    reason for existence;
-   Build the company’s symbols, rituals, and stories around it.

Brand and purpose, brands with a conscience

Branding aims at building a realistic meaning of the company in its
interaction with people, independently but including the role they play
as citizens.

In addition, when the purpose includes the impact on society and the
environment, the brand as a business platform helps prove the
consciousness of the company, not to mention internal issues of
governance and responsible investments.

When stakeholders understand, live, and share what the company stands
for and why that matters, the results come on their own, without out of
the ordinary efforts. That’s why I said, at the very beginning of this
article, that companies that act in line with their purpose create
value, generate superior results, and could even have a positive impact.

SEE ALSO:Podcast Ep 7: Why Brands Need Long-Term Commitment to Building
Credibility, with David Aaker

If the company can’t deliver on purpose, its brand promise is basically
empty nonsense.

Three questions arise:

-   Where are your company and your brand on this journey towards brands
    with a conscience?
-   Is the company’s purpose explicit and does it need to be
    transformed?
-   Is the company ready for a transformation that will lead to growth
    into both results and impact?

Cover image source: cottonbro

Share on:

-   facebook
-   twitter
-   linkedin

[Cristian Saracco]

-   Cristian Saracco

-   1 article

-   -   twitter
    -   linkedin
    -   Website

With over 30 years of international experience, Cristian helps companies
transform, grow, and embrace disruption by creating sustainable and
long-lasting value through brands, people, and experiences. He develops
companies worthy of admiration, taking them to the next level, socially
and environmentally. As a craftsman strategist, Cristian develops and
revitalizes meaningful and familiar brand experiences, for every key
audience, at every touchpoint. He has also lectured in undergraduate,
graduate, and executive education programs, published articles, papers,
and book chapters, and is a regular speaker at events in Europe and the
Americas.

We like you. You like us. Sign up for our newsletter.

Subscribe now

Featured Masterclass

[03_Purpose_Image_750x1000]

Purpose – It’s Not for Everyone

Register to watch the recording on demand.

Leading Stories

The Cost of a Bad Employer Brand

Strategy

Solid Branding Means Niching for a Person, Not a Market

Strategy

Why Rebrand? Or Better Yet, Why Not?

Strategy

Editor’s Pick

[]

ESG Empowerment: Brands Should Listen to Employees, Not Reactionary Politicians

Sustainability

[]

As with Human Evolution, Brand Growth Is Found Amidst Dichotomies

Content

[]

Why Are African Brands Not Going Global at Scale?

Strategy

×

brandingmag

Please register to be able to use favorites.

-   Sign in
-   Register

Sign in with your email / username

Email address / Username

Password

Remember me

Forgot Password?

Don’t have an account? Register.

First Name*

Last Name*

Email Address*

Password (minimum 8 characters)*

Repeat password*

Company*

Job Function*

Strategy / leadership Marketing & communication Engineering / tech Data
/ analytics Design Product Business development / sales Operations
Corporate innovation Corporate development / investment Finance People /
HR Legal Other

Seniority*

C-level VP/Director/Partner Mid-level manager Operational Specialist or
Consultant Entry-level talent Other

I agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy

Sign me up for the weekly newsletter

Register

×

brandingmag

We're doing a bit of soul-searching to better know our readers and
improve your experience. Please take this 2-min survey and you might
just WIN the first edition of our new eBook series: State of the Brand!

Take survey

I agree to the Terms and Conditions

×

Brandingmag

Use the Bm | Bn switcher in the top-left corner to seamlessly switch
between our Brandingmag and Branding.News websites.

Got it

brandingmag

MailChimp error message holder

Got it

Brandingmag

Ad block

We noticed you're using an ad blocker. Totally understandable, but our
ads are minimal, always relevant, and a great help for supporting our
ongoing efforts to narrate a quality discussion around branding.

Please consider disabling your ad blocker or sign up/sign in before
diving into our exclusive insights:

Sign in

Sign up

-   About us
-   Newsletter
-   Contact
-   Terms Of Use
-   Privacy Policy

-   facebook
-   twitter
-   youtube
-   linkedIn
-   Instagram

© 2025 Brandium, Inc. Ltd. | All rights reserved

We use cookies to help us improve, promote, and protect our services. By
continuing to use Our Sites, you agree to our Cookie Policy Learn more

I agree!

newsletter

×

We like you. You like us. Sign up for our weekly newsletter.

First Name*

Last Name*

Email Address*

Company*

Job Function* Strategy / leadership Marketing & communication
Engineering / tech Data / analytics Design Product Business development
/ sales Operations Corporate innovation Corporate development /
investment Finance People / HR Legal Other

Seniority* C-level VP/Director/Partner Mid-level manager Operational
Specialist or Consultant Entry-level talent Other

I agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy

SEND

* indicates required
