   #bricefoundation - RSS

   top of page

     * Wix Facebook page
     * Instagram Classic
     *
     * Wix Twitter page
     * Wix Google+ page
     * YouTube Classic

   Why Donating to Us
   How to Get involved?
   Cholera Bacterium Disorder in Haiti
   blogging

The Issue of "Restavek" in Haiti

Did you know 2 out of every 10 children in Haiti are being Forced to
Performed Domestic Work?

Learn more...

     * MAIN
     * ABOUT US
          + Message from our President
          + Our Mission
          + Poverty/Facts
     * DISCOVER HAITI
          + Haiti Culture and Tradition
          + Haiti's Myth
          + Our Work in Haiti
          + What is Restavek
     * PROJECTS
          + Empowering the Poor
          + Support & Protect Children's Future
          + Framing Future Leaders
          + Empowering Women
     * GET INVOLVED
          + Christmas for the Poor
          + Our Work in The U.S.
          + Ecole Communautaire F. Dist.
          + School Bon Berger Dist. 1
     * DONATE
          + Upcoming Events
          + Event Page
          + Our Supporters
          + Cholera in Haiti
     * GALLERY
     * CONTACT US
          + WebMaster
          + Find us
          + FAQS
          + Blog
     * More

   Use tab to navigate through the menu items.

GUILTY CONSCIENCE/BAD CONSCIENCE

   Guilt or guilty conscience is one of the most common negative or sad
   emotions that people experience almost every day. If not addressed
   properly, a guilty conscience can destroy your relationship, steal your
   joy, your happiness, and even your future. Yet, the majority of us
   don't know how to deal with it in a healthy way. According to the
   German philosopher, Friedrich Nietzsche (1844 - 1900). A guilty
   conscience can push a person to become very cruel and do horrible
   things as a result. Horrible things like killing, committing suicide,
   etc. Yet, just like any other emotions, there's not a clear definition
   for a "guilty conscience". So to better understand what it is, one has
   to explore the concept of right and wrong within society.

   In psychology, for Sigmund Freud guilt resides under the surface veneer
   of a person's behavior (1856 - 1939). With that says, guilt is a
   self-conscious emotion that signals a person when his/her actions or
   behaviors may have caused or will cause harm to others either
   physically, emotionally or both. So to feel guilty is to feel painful
   regret for something wrong one thinks he/she might have done.

   Why Feeling Guilty is important?

   Last week I wrote about Psychological Deflection and the major role our
   ego plays in it. In that article, I said that our ego builds a
   self-defense system designed to protect us from feeling guilty or
   remorseful for our bad behaviors or actions in order to keep our
   self-esteem, self-worth, etc intact...I further said that over time,
   that same self-defense system will start having negative effects on our
   self-image and the way we view the world. This means no one can buy
   himself/herself a "get-out-jail-free card" in this universe. To
   maintain emotional and psychological balance, it is necessary to
   experience guilt for our bad behavior or actions. Besides, a guilty
   conscience is like having a snooze alarm in your head that won't shut
   off until it is addressed and it has to be addressed in a healthy way.

   If not addressed properly, a guilty conscience will make it very hard
   for you to think straight and make the right decisions when necessary,
   a guilty conscience can also trigger shame, anger, emptiness, and in
   many cases, sabotage your entire life and your relationship with
   others.

   A guilty conscience that is not addressed properly will also make you
   become very paranoid and delusional. For example; a guilty conscience
   may make you feel that everything people say or write in their social
   media pages is about you and then consider it as a personal attack
   against, therefore, you feel the urgency to respond to them
   defensively. Such behavior will eventually throw you off balance
   emotionally and psychologically and make you a good candidate for
   anxiety, depression, or much worse. A guilty conscience can also make
   you hate and punish yourself, avoid hearing nor seeing the person that
   you've wronged, it will also push you to talk negatively about that
   person in order to justify your bad behavior or actions, and in many
   cases, it can even make you feel resentful towards him/her because
   every time you hear or see him/her it reminds you what you have done.

   Guilt can also make you hate that person you've wronged and try to do
   more harm to him/her should you get the opportunity.

   How to Effectively Deal with a Guilty Conscience?

   1) The first step in dealing with a guilty conscience is always to
   surrender to the truth (Repentance). This means to stop fighting or
   denying your guilt because the more you deny it the more intense the
   pain will become. Never deny your guilt nor try to blame it on someone
   else because, as I've said before, no one can buy himself/herself a
   get-out-jail-free card in this universe. This means denying your guilt
   will have other effects. 2) The second step is to stop punishing
   yourself. Understand that no one is perfect including you, which leaves
   the avenue of life wide open before you to make plenty of mistakes. So
   own your mistakes and learn from them. If you're in an environment
   where you feel like you're constantly being judged, remove yourself
   from that environment as soon as you can.

   3) The third step in dealing with a guilty conscience is to keep your
   emotions and behavior in check at all time. There's nothing more
   embarrassing for a person than not being unable to control his/her
   emotions or behavior. Such a person can easily snap at others for no
   justifiable reason (s) and it does not look good at all. 4) The fourth
   step is forgiveness and this is very, very important. Through my
   personal and professional experience, I come to the conclusion that the
   hardest part of forgiveness is not forgiving someone who've wronged
   you, it is forgiving ourselves, in other words, self-forgiveness. But
   here's the thing, to take that pressure off your back, to enjoy life
   once again, to build high self-esteem and confidence in oneself,
   self-forgiveness is vital. So seek forgiveness from the person you've
   wronged, forgive yourself, and then let it go.

   5) The fifth step is to focus on the "now", rather than the past. I
   often hear people said to others that they can't live in the past or
   repeat the past. Whenever I hear that I smile because it's easier said
   than done. In fact, the majority of us are actually living in the past
   emotionally and psychologically. And the sad thing is, they're not even
   aware of it. If you don't own your past, in other words, take
   responsibility and be mindful about it, I can tell you right now that
   your life is on a repeat mode and there's not much difference between
   your past and your current situation. This means, your past keeps
   repeating itself in your present and if you don't change your way of
   doing things it will repeat itself in your future also. 6) The sixth
   and final step is to always seek professional help (psychologist) if
   feel like you're overwhelmed by a guilty conscience because it can lead
   to more severe emotional or psychological situations, even suicide.

   #guilt #guiltyconscience
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
     * Psychology

   (BUTTON) Post not marked as liked

Featured Posts

   If you don't learn how to Control your Anger, it will control you and
   eventually Consume you.

   If you don't learn how to Control your Anger, it will control you and
   eventually Consume you.
   The First Impression

   The First Impression
   (BUTTON)

Recent Posts

   If you don't learn how to Control your Anger, it will control you and
   eventually Consume you.

   If you don't learn how to Control your Anger, it will control you and
   eventually Consume you.
   The First Impression

   The First Impression
   GUILTY CONSCIENCE/BAD CONSCIENCE

   GUILTY CONSCIENCE/BAD CONSCIENCE
   PSYCHOLOGICAL DEFLECTION

   PSYCHOLOGICAL DEFLECTION
   SUBJECTIVITY

   SUBJECTIVITY
   Individualistic Moral Relativism vs Cultural Moral Relativism &
   Kohlberg's Conventional Stag

   Individualistic Moral Relativism vs Cultural Moral Relativism &
   Kohlberg's Conventional Stag
   Your Vibe will always Attract your Tribe.

   Your Vibe will always Attract your Tribe.
   Do all Religions Lead to the Same Place

   Do all Religions Lead to the Same Place
   Gender Identity, Gender Role, and Emotions

   Gender Identity, Gender Role, and Emotions
   The Importance of Knowing and Understanding a Child's Cognitive
   Developmental Stages

   The Importance of Knowing and Understanding a Child's Cognitive
   Developmental Stages

Archive

     * February 2020 (1) 1 post
     * January 2020 (1) 1 post
     * June 2019 (3) 3 posts
     * April 2019 (4) 4 posts
     * March 2019 (4) 4 posts
     * February 2019 (1) 1 post
     * December 2017 (1) 1 post
     * April 2017 (2) 2 posts
     * March 2017 (1) 1 post
     * June 2016 (3) 3 posts
     * May 2016 (2) 2 posts
     * April 2016 (6) 6 posts
     * March 2016 (16) 16 posts
     * February 2016 (3) 3 posts
     * January 2016 (3) 3 posts

Search By Tags

   No tags yet.

Follow Us

     * Facebook Basic Square
     * Twitter Basic Square
     * Google+ Basic Square

     * Twitter Clean
     * Instagram Clean
     *
     * w-youtube
     * facebook

   Brice Foundation, Int'l is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization that is
   legally recognized by  both the U.S. and the Haitian Government, this
   means every donation given to us is completely tax deductible. Our tax
   ID # is 46-3488187

   Powered by:

   Brice foundation Inc.

   It is illegal to copy or use any information on this website without
   first, obtaining authorization from Brice Foundation Inc.

   Copyright © 2011-2020 Brice Foundation Int'l. All rights reserved.

   ​​Call us:

   ﻿1(866)579.9729

   509.492.892-76

   Fax:

   866.579.9729

   ​help​

   Contact us at​                                         W.I. Location:

   1335 Kingsley Ave.                               In Haiti

   Unit 2124                                              Tabbarre

   Orange Park, Florida 32067                 Jacmel

   In The U.S.                                        Port-au-Prince

   ​Privacy Policy

   ​

   WebMaster

   ﻿
   bottom of page
