[Encyclopedia Britannica]

Search Britannica

Click here to search

[Encyclopedia Britannica]

Search Britannica

Click here to search

SUBSCRIBE

SUBSCRIBE

Login

https://premium.britannica.com/premium-membership/?utm_source=premium&utm_medium=nav-login-box&utm_campaign=evergreen

Subscribe  Now

-   Home
-   History & Society
-   Science & Tech
-   Biographies
-   Animals & Nature
-   Geography & Travel
-   Arts & Culture
-   ProCon
-   Money

-   Games & Quizzes
-   Videos
-   On This Day
-   One Good Fact
-   Dictionary
-   New Articles

History & Society

-   Lifestyles & Social Issues
-   Philosophy & Religion
-   Politics, Law & Government
-   World History

Science & Tech

-   Health & Medicine
-   Science
-   Technology

Biographies

-   Browse Biographies

Animals & Nature

-   Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates
-   Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates
-   Environment
-   Fossils & Geologic Time
-   Mammals
-   Plants

Geography & Travel

-   Geography & Travel

Arts & Culture

-   Entertainment & Pop Culture
-   Literature
-   Sports & Recreation
-   Visual Arts

-   Companions
-   Demystified
-   Image Galleries
-   Lists
-   Podcasts
-   Spotlight
-   Summaries
-   The Forum
-   Top Questions
-   #WTFact

-   Britannica Kids

Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech
Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon
Money Videos

philosophy of mind

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   

    Philosophy of mind and empirical psychology

-   
    Terminology and distinctions

    -   Some basic metaphysical categories
        -   Substance

        -   Object

        -   Abstract and concrete

        -   Properties and relations

        -   States and events

    -   Thoughts and attitudes
        -   Thoughts and propositions

        -   Types and tokens

        -   Concepts

        -   Propositional attitudes

    -   Sensations and qualitative states

    -   Emotions, moods, and traits

-   
    Main problematic phenomena

    -   Consciousness

    -   Rationality
        -   Deduction

        -   Induction

        -   Abduction

        -   Practical reason

    -   Intentionality

    -   Peripheral issues
        -   Free will

        -   The soul and personal identity

-   
    Traditional metaphysical positions

    -   Reductionism
        -   The identity theory

        -   Explanatory gaps

    -   Dualism
        -   Substance dualism and property dualism

        -   Causal relations and epiphenomenalism

    -   Eliminativism: Behaviourism and instrumentalism
        -   The need for nontendentious evidence

        -   Radical behaviourism

    -   Irreferentialism
        -   Wittgenstein

        -   Ryle and analytical behaviourism

    -   Functionalism

-   
    The computational-representational theory of thought (CRTT)

    -   The computational account of rationality

    -   Research strategies for intentionality

    -   Objections and responses
        -   Introspection

        -   Homunculi

        -   Artifactuality and artificial intelligence (AI)

        -   Searle’s “Chinese room”

        -   Block’s “nation of China”

-   
    Further issues

    -   Consciousness reconsidered
        -   Executives, buffers, and HOTs

        -   “What it’s like”

        -   Qualitative states

        -   Representationalism

    -   Remaining gaps and first-person skepticism

References & Edit History Related Topics

Images & Videos

[Max Weber] [tapestry: The Lady and the Unicorn] [Gottlob Frege]

[Hear how through philosophy the personal identity of a person is
defined]

[B.F. Skinner] [Sydney Shoemaker] [Francis Crick]

For Students

[Max Weber]

philosophy of mind summary

Related Questions

-   What was Bertrand Russell’s childhood like?
-   Where was Bertrand Russell educated?
-   What did Bertrand Russell write?
-   Why is Bertrand Russell significant?
-   What did David Hume write?

Read Next

[Aristotle (384-322 BC), Ancient Greek philosopher and scientist. One of
the most influential philosophers in the history of Western thought,
Aristotle established the foundations for the modern scientific method
of enquiry. Statue]

Philosophers to Know, Part I

[Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), German philosopher. Print published in
London, 1812. Profile portrait surrounded by Ouroboros ancient
Egyptian-Greek symbolic serpent with tail in mouth devouring itself
representing unity of material and spiritual in eternal...]

Philosophers to Know, Part II

[Well-balanced of stones on the top of boulder]

What’s the Difference Between Morality and Ethics?

Discover

[Government officials are erasing graffiti of Islamic State (ISIS)
banner in Solo, Java, Indonesia.]

Is It ISIS or ISIL?

[Close up of books. Stack of books, pile of books, literature, reading.
Homepage 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society]

12 Novels Considered the “Greatest Book Ever Written”

[Image of jewish holiday Hanukkah with drawing menorah candles
(traditional Candelabra), donuts and dreidels (spinning top) over
chalkboard background. Chanukah.]

Hanukkah, the Festival of Lights

[Estimated battle casualties, Normandy invasion, World War II. WWII,
D-Day]

Estimated Battle Casualties During the Normandy Invasion and Campaign to
Liberate Paris (June–August 1944)

[The Colosseum, Rome, Italy. Giant amphitheatre built in Rome under the
Flavian emperors. (ancient architecture; architectural ruins)]

New Seven Wonders of the World

[Time zone map with standard time zones and International Date Line]

Why Are Some Time Zones 30 Minutes Off Instead of an Hour?

[Cathedrale St.Jean in Lyon, France has a 14th-century astronomical
clock that shows religious feast days till the year 2019; Perpetual
Calendar]

Ten Days That Vanished: The Switch to the Gregorian Calendar

Contents

Philosophy & Religion Philosophical Issues

Consciousness

inphilosophy of mind inMain problematic phenomena

Ask the Chatbot a Question

More Actions

Print

print Print

Please select which sections you would like to print:

-   Table Of Contents

Cite

verifiedCite

While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there
may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual
or other sources if you have any questions.

Select Citation Style

MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style

Copy Citation

Share

Share

Share to social media

Facebook X

URL

https://www.britannica.com/topic/philosophy-of-mind

Feedback

External Websites

Feedback

Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to
improve this article (requires login).

Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other

Your Feedback

Submit Feedback

Thank you for your feedback

Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to
revise the article.

External Websites

-   PhilArchive - Information-Theoretic Philosophy of Mind (PDF)
-   Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Leibniz’s Philosophy of Mind
-   Academia - How to Teach Philosophy of Mind
-   The Basics of Philosophy - Philosophy of Mind
-   Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Philosophy of Mind
-   Humanities LibreTexts - Philosophy of Mind

Ask the Chatbot a Question

Written by

Georges Rey

Professor of Philosophy, University of Maryland, College Park. Author of
Contemporary Philosophy of Mind: A Contentiously Classical Approach and
others.

Georges Rey

Fact-checked by

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they
have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by
working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write
new content and verify and edit content received from contributors.

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Last Updated: Dec 28, 2024 • Article History

Table of Contents

Table of Contents

Ask the Chatbot a Question

Key People:
    Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
    René Descartes
    David Hume
    Hilary Putnam
    Bertrand Russell

(Show more)

Related Topics:
    functionalism
    mind-body problem
    mind-body dualism
    problem of other minds
    intentionality

(Show more)

On the Web:
    PhilArchive - Information-Theoretic Philosophy of Mind (PDF) (Dec.
    28, 2024)

(Show more)

See all related content

The word consciousness is used in a variety of ways that need to be
distinguished. Sometimes the word means merely any human mental activity
at all (as when one talks about the “history of consciousness”), and
sometimes it means merely being awake (as in As the anesthetic wore off,
the animal regained consciousness). The most philosophically troublesome
usage concerns phenomena with which people seem to be “directly
acquainted”—as the British philosopher Bertrand Russell (1872–1970)
described them—each in his own case. Each person seems to have direct,
immediate knowledge of his own conscious sensations and of the contents
of his propositional attitudes—what he consciously thinks, believes,
desires, hopes, fears, and so on. In common philosophical parlance, a
person is said to have “incorrigible” (or uncorrectable) access to his
own mental states. For many people, the existence of these conscious
states in their own case is more obvious and undeniable than anything
else in the world. Indeed, the French mathematician and philosopher René
Descartes (1596–1650) regarded his immediate conscious thoughts as the
basis of all of the rest of his knowledge. Views that emphasize this
first-person immediacy of conscious states have consequently come to be
called “Cartesian.”

It turns out to be surprisingly difficult to say much about
consciousness that is not highly controversial. Initial efforts in the
19th century to approach psychology with the rigour of other
experimental sciences led researchers to engage in careful introspection
of their own mental states. Although there emerged some interesting
results regarding the relation of certain sensory states to external
stimulation—for example, laws proposed by Gustav Theodor Fechner
(1801–87) that relate the apparent to the real amplitude of a sound—much
of the research dissolved into vagaries and complexities of experience
that varied greatly over different individuals and about which
interesting generalizations were not forthcoming.

It is worth pausing over some of the difficulties of introspection and
the consequent pitfalls of thinking of conscious processes as the
central subject matter of psychology. While it can seem natural to think
that all mental phenomena are accessible to consciousness, close
attention to the full range of cases suggests otherwise. The
Austrian-born British philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) was
particularly adept at calling attention to the rich and subtle variety
of ordinary mental states and to how little they lend themselves to the
model of an introspectively observed object. In a typical passage from
his later writings (Zettel, §§484–504), he asked:

  Is it hair-splitting to say: —joy, enjoyment, delight, are not
  sensations? —Let us at least ask ourselves: How much analogy is there
  between delight and what we call “sensation”? “I feel great joy”
  —Where? —that sounds like nonsense. And yet one does say “I feel a
  joyful agitation in my breast.” —But why is joy not localized? Is it
  because it is distributed over the whole body? … Love is not a
  feeling. Love is put to the test, pain not. One does not say: “That
  was not true pain, or it would not have gone off so quickly.”

In a related vein, the American linguist Ray Jackendoff proposed that
one is never directly conscious of abstract ideas, such as goodness and
justice—they are not items in the stream of consciousness. At best, one
is aware of the perceptual qualities one might associate with such
ideas—for example, an image of someone acting in a kindly way. While it
can seem that there is something right in such suggestions, it also
seems to be immensely difficult to determine exactly what the truth
might be on the basis of introspection alone.

In the late 20th century, the validity and reliability of introspection
were subject to much experimental study. In an influential review of the
literature on “self-attribution,” the American psychologists Richard
Nisbett and Timothy Wilson discussed a wide range of experiments that
showed that people are often demonstrably mistaken about their own
psychological processes. For example, in problem-solving tasks, people
are often sensitive to crucial clues of which they are quite unaware,
and they often provide patently confabulated accounts of the
problem-solving methods they actually employ. Nisbett and Wilson
speculated that in many cases introspection may not involve privileged
access to one’s own mental states but rather the imposition upon oneself
of popular theories about what mental states a person in one’s situation
is likely to have. This possibility should be considered seriously when
evaluating many of the traditional claims about the alleged
incorrigibility of people’s access to their own minds.

In any event, it is important to note that not all mental phenomena are
conscious. Indeed, the existence of unconscious mental states has been
recognized in the West since the time of the ancient Greeks. Obvious
examples include the beliefs, long-range plans, and desires that a
person is not consciously thinking about at a particular time, as well
as things that have “slipped one’s mind,” though they must in some way
still be there, since one can be reminded of them. Plato thought that
the kinds of a priori reasoning typically used in mathematics and
geometry involve the “recollection” (anamnesis) of temporarily forgotten
thoughts from a previous life. Modern followers of Sigmund Freud
(1856–1939) have argued that a great many ordinary parapraxes (or
“Freudian slips”) are the result of deeply repressed unconscious
thoughts and desires. And, as noted above, many experiments reveal
myriad ways in which people are unaware of, and sometimes demonstrably
mistaken about, the character of their mental processes, which are
therefore unconscious at least at the time they occur.

Partly out of frustration with introspectionism, psychologists during
the first half of the 20th century tended to ignore consciousness
entirely and instead study only “objective behaviour” (see below Radical
behaviourism). In the last decades of the century, psychologists began
to turn their attention once again to consciousness and introspection,
but their methods differed radically from those of early
introspectionists, in ways that can be understood against the background
of other issues.

One might wonder what makes an unconscious mental process “mental” at
all. If a person does not have immediate knowledge of it, why is it not
merely part of the purely physical machinery of the brain? Why bring in
mentality at all? Accessibility to consciousness, however, is not the
only criterion for determining whether a given state or process is
mental. One alternative criterion is that mental states and processes
enter into the rationality of the systems of which they are a part.
