Philosophy Terms

Conscience

I. Definition

Conscience is a faculty of the mind that motivates us to act morally—or
at least according to our most deeply held values.  Most say it is a
form of intuition and uses emotion, although others have argued that it
should be shaped by reason.  It is a private experience, and a form of
self-knowledge; from one’s conscience one can learn one’s own values and
morals.  This is the root of the word, from the latin con-scientia,
perhaps translatable as “together-with-knowing” – to be together with
one’s knowledge (of morality).

Yet, conscience has been thought by many to be informed by an objective
morality, with divine, transcendental, or natural sources.  Even in our
society, where we ostensibly recognize the cultural and personal
relativity of morality, conscience is granted a special status, with
laws protecting the rights of doctors and others not to violate their
consciences.  So, conscience is private, subjective, and culturally
relative, but carries legal and political weight.

There are many different ideas about conscience—religious,
philosophical, scientific, legal, and popular:

-   Religious: in most religions, the morality that informs conscience
    does or should come from either God, or an enlightened mind.
    Religions differ as to whether conscience is thought of mainly as a
    punisher (e.g. Catholic) or as a virtue to be cultivated (e.g.
    Protestant, Buddhist).
-   Philosophical: many philosophers have written that a truly moral
    conscience requires the exercise of reason; others have claimed that
    it is an intuition of objective moral truth. Pre-modern philosophers
    tended to believe in a natural and objective morality informing
    conscience—something like a truly moral instinct.  Modern
    philosophers tend to recognize the cultural and individual
    relativity of morality, and many present arguments based on
    scientific theories about mind, evolution, and society.
-   Scientific: such as theories in evolutionary psychology, cognitive
    science, and sociology.
-   Legal: Our society seems to recognize “freedom of conscience” – that
    we should be free to obey our consciences – within limits.
    Considering that we don’t have a clear or unified philosophy of
    conscience, this raises legal, political, and social issues.
-   Popular: Our everyday notions of conscience are philosophically
    interesting. Consider that conscience is a part of us opposing
    actions that we ourselves apparently already consider immoral, but
    are in danger of doing anyway.  It seems a little paradoxical.  Why
    do we need a conscience? Evolutionary theory most likely has the
    answer (see “History” section)

Thought about conscience is so diverse and complex that a comprehensive
treatment is not possible. This seems another paradox about conscience;
we know it most intimately in ourselves, but there is no consensus about
where it comes from, or how much it should be respected.

 

II. Controversies about Conscience

Freedom of conscience is part of the United Nations’ Declaration of
Human Rights, and the laws of many nations.  Yet we have reason to
question the idea.  Former Nazi generals have told interviewers that
they acted with a clear conscience, because their actions were
sanctioned by their leadership and society.  This would be consistent
with ideas about conscience as a social instinct, but not necessarily an
altruistic one as Darwin thought—perhaps conscience merely urges us to
conform with the mores of our society or belief-systems.

Freedom of conscience is problematic because it’s perfectly possible for
people’s consciences to insist on actions that most of consider harmful
to other human beings—such as refusing to vaccinate their children.

There are several traditional arguments in favor of freedom of
conscience:

-   The argument from hypocrisy or ineffectiveness: Most people agree
    that it is impossible to change a person’s conscience from the
    outside; therefore, not granting freedom of conscience means
    requiring people to act contrary to their beliefs, which seems
    wrong. This was a reason to consider persecuting heretics
    ineffective from the medieval Catholic point of view; but Aquinas
    and others then justified it for other reasons.

However, the argument from hypocrisy can be turned around; if you can’t
change a person’s conscience, then they still have freedom of
conscience, even if you force them to behave in a certain way.

-   The argument from ignorance: This is based on the recognition of
    relativism and subjectivism. If our consciences don’t give us
    objective moral guidance, then you can’t assume that yours is right
    and another’s wrong, therefore you don’t have a right to deny them
    freedom of conscience.
-   The argument from legitimization: John Stuart Mill argued that it is
    best for society if all people express their convictions freely, for
    that will make it possible, through comparison and debate, to better
    approach truth.

However, none of these arguments completely addresses the conflicts
between freedom of conscience and public well-being.  Some might say
that a doctor who refuses to perform a life-saving operation out of
conscience should be charged with negligence or even manslaughter. 
While others might feel that performing the operation is murder. The
precise limits of freedom of conscience are still an open debate with
profound consequences.

 

III. Quotes about Conscience

Quotation #1:

  “There comes a time when one must take a position that is neither
  safe, nor politic, nor popular, but he must take it because conscience
  tells him it is right.”
  ― Martin Luther King Jr., A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings
  and Speeches

This quote seems to represent the way most of us naturally think of
conscience—assuming that conscience is always right, as if it’s a direct
line to God or some other source of objective moral knowledge.  This
also implies that it is right to obey conscience even if opposes one’s
social and legal environment.  One the one hand, these could be
incorrect and dangerous assumptions; on the other, we could never change
injustice in our society, like Dr. King, without sometimes trusting
conscience over social norms.

Quotation #2:

  “[T]he infliction of cruelty with a good conscience is a delight to
  moralists. That is why they invented Hell.” ― Bertrand Russell,
  Skeptical Essays

Bertrand Russel cuts to the heart of the problem with everyday notions
about the sacred truth of conscience.  People who were certain they knew
the moral truth and followed their conscience have included members of
the Spanish Inquisition, the Crusaders, the Nazis, and most terrorists. 
Such people did indeed invent hell!

Quotation #3:

  “A clear conscience is the sure sign of a bad memory.” ― Mark Twain

This one speaks for itself!

 

IV. Types of Conscience

There are no ‘types of conscience’ recognized by philosophers except
‘critical conscience’ which means the application of critical reasoning
to ethical decisions.  Many religious web-pages list their own types of
conscience, in light of their beliefs.

Conscience versus Sociopathy

Sociopaths are, arguably, individuals with no conscience.  They are also
defined as incapable of feeling empathy, guilt, fear, or shame at
hurting others or violating any notion of morality.  Interestingly,
psychologists say that sociopaths understand morality and may even agree
with the moral values of their society.  They lack only the brain
connection between those values and the emotions that would prevent them
from hurting others, enabling them to act without remorse.  Most experts
claim that it is an incurable condition and neuroscientific research
shows concrete differences between normal and sociopathic brains. 
Ironically, then sociopaths seem to be evidence that a capacity for
conscience is innate in normal humans.

 

V. History of Conscience

Before cultural relativity and subjectivism came into vogue during the
20^(th) century, conscience was considered a source of objective moral
knowledge by almost everyone, however in different senses in different
cultures.  In ancient Hinduism, Buddhism, and Taoism, knowledge of good
and evil was thought to be the natural long-term result of practicing
moral action and correct contemplation–in Hindu thought, through the
accumulation of good karma, in Buddhist and Taoist thought, through
purification of the heart and mind. Moral knowledge in these
belief-systems was an aspect of enlightened mind—true knowledge of the
nature of self and reality. Ironically though, each belief system had
different ideas about the content of this truth, and morality.  In
Hinduism, it was primarily about self-sacrifice, in Buddhism compassion,
and in Taoism, harmony with society and nature.

Judaism, Christianity, and Islam represented a very different
conception, arguably.  All three religions are supposed to accept the
story of Genesis which says that man’s acquisition of the knowledge of
good and evil was a fall from grace, ‘original sin.’  Therefore,
according to some interpretations, following one’s own intuitions is
more likely a source of sin than morality.  Instead, obedience to God’s
law is thought the only true morality.  This would mean that true
conscience is knowledge of God’s law, whether that comes directly from
God, or through obedience to scripture or clergy; all these
possibilities—direct revelation, scripture, and obedience to
authorities–have been claimed as the source of moral knowledge in these
religions.  However, in practice, these religions also teach
purification of the mind to attain true conscience; where Eastern
religions teach that a pure mind allows the truth to emerge from within
one’s own consciousness, most versions of the Abrahamic religions see a
pure mind as a prerequisite for receiving God’s truth.

Greek and Roman thought emphasized reason and knowledge in making moral
decisions, a tradition beginning with Aristotle’s ideas about the
development of virtuous character and wisdom through reason and
practice.  This is also true of Judaism, known for its Talmud, a body of
writing devoted to interpreting scripture and applying it to ethical
issues through rational analysis and debate.

Despite the emphasis on blind obedience in Christianity, medieval
Christian philosophers developed a theory of conscience with a strong
role for both intuition and reasoning.  St. Bonaventure and St. Aquinas
wrote of synderesis – a divine spark of moral knowledge – which could
only come to a mind which had been cultivated by reason and
contemplation to overcome the distortions and corruption of social
conditioning.

In the 17^(th) century, Spinoza similarly wrote that it was necessary to
practice and develop reason to transcend socially conditioned emotions
and perceptions.  However instead of positing a diving spark as the
source of moral truth, Spinoza said that if you view problems from the
perspective of eternity, with a peaceful mind, you will perceive moral
truth.   Kant also regarded critical reasoning as an important element
of conscience, believing that moral truth could be evaluated objectively
in light of his ‘categorical imperative.’  Other 18^(th) century
philosophers believed that conscience was purely intuitive, excluding
reason, but like Kant, many of them also believed in the objectivity of
the moral truth informing conscience.

From the 18^(th) century on, increasing numbers of philosophers spoke
for pragmatic and relativistic ideas about conscience.  John Locke wrote
about how a moral conscience might oppose the laws of the state, and
Thomas Hobbes insisted that opinions based on conscience could easily be
wrong or in contradiction to other people’s consciences.  So, these and
other philosophers also advocated for a ‘critical conscience’–and some
skepticism about the dictates of conscience in general.

In the 19^(th) century, Darwin hypothesized that conscience evolved to
resolve conflicts between instincts, such as between instincts for
self-preservation and instincts to protect and cooperate with other
human beings.

In the 20^(th) century, Freud analyzed conscience as an effect of the
super-ego; as we grow up, natural instincts such as aggression and
sexual desire must be frequently frustrated, and even punished, by
parents and peers, in order for us to develop into well-adjusted members
of society.  This process creates the super-ego, where we internalize
the beliefs, implicit or explicit, about right and wrong in our culture
and the super-ego causes us to feel guilt or anxiety when we violate
them.

Where Darwin said that conscience evolved to resolve inner conflicts,
other more recent evolutionary psychologists suggest that it evolved to
motivate altruistic behavior, which is now thought to be evolutionarily
adaptive for social creatures.

Few today would claim that conscience is a source of objective morality,
divine, transcendental or otherwise, since it is obvious that two
people’s consciences or religions can dictate opposing moralities—such
as pro-choice and pro-life.   Therefore, philosophers today are more
concerned with exploring the consequences of this relativity of
conscience, especially since people still seem to think of conscience as
objectively true, sacred, and inviolable. Which leads naturally to our
controversy – “freedom of conscience.”

 

VI. Conscience in Pop Culture

Example #1: Pinocchio

Une erreur s'est produite.

Impossible d'exécuter JavaScript.

In this clip from the old Disney Pinocchio film, Jiminy Cricket gives
the boy who would be human a lecture and song about conscience with the
message “always let your conscience be your guide.”  Although that
message implies relying on intuitive conscience, it’s interesting that
the Cricket first tries to explain something like ‘critical conscience’
to Pinocchio before giving up in confusion and falling back on a
traditional Christian notion of conscience—resistance to temptation.

Example #2: Emperor’s New Groove

Une erreur s'est produite.

Essayez de regarder cette vidéo sur www.youtube.com, ou activez
JavaScript dans votre navigateur si ce n'est pas déjà le cas.

This scene from the Emperor’s New Groove nicely dramatizes one of the
most popular conceptions of conscience in our society—the devil and
angel on your shoulders.  This colorful and compelling image seems to
imply that true morality consists of righteousness. While following the
one that “rocks” is the evil one.  However, instead of emphasizing good
vs evil, they both just confuse the guy and he ends up dismissing them
both.

Quiz

1.

Which of the following is an undisputed property of conscience?

a.That it gives objective moral truth.

b.That it gives self-knowledge.

c.That people must be allowed to follow their conscience.

d.All of the Above

2.

Which of the following have people believed to be the source of
conscience?

a.Nature

b.Culture

c.God

d.All of the Above

3.

Who believed that true moral intuition depended on cultivating one’s
mind?

a.Aquinas

b.Buddha

c.Aristotle

d.All of the Above

4.

Which best describes the Catholic notion of conscience?

a.Always follow your heart?

b.Use intuition to interpret the Bible correctly.

c.Follow the Bible as interpreted by church authorities.

d.All of the Above

Lastest Philosophers Entries

-   William Faulkner

    []
    []

-   Euripides

    []
    []

-   Epicurious

    []
    []

-   Ralph Waldo Emerson

    []
    []

-   John Dewey

    []
    []

-   Dante Alighieri

    []
    []

-   Confucius

    []
    []

-   Comte

    [Isidore Auguste Marie Francois Xavier Comte]
    [Isidore Auguste Marie Francois Xavier Comte]

View all Philosophers

List of Terms

-   7 Educational Philosophy

-   Absentee Voting

-   Absolutism

-   Absurd Philosophy

-   Absurdism

-   Adjourn

-   Altruism

-   Amendment

-   Analytic Philosophy

-   Anthropological Linguistics

-   Anthropomorphism

-   Applied Ethics

-   Applied Logic

-   Areas of Philosophy

-   Argument

-   Art’s Role in Society

-   Arts and Humanities

-   Assistant Minority Leader

-   Ataraxia

-   Atheism

-   Autocracy

-   Autonomy

-   Avoiding Hasty Generalizations

-   Axiology

-   Axiom of Choice

-   Axiom of Constructibility

-   Axiom of Determinacy

-   Axiom of Extensionality

-   Axiom of Foundation

-   Axiom of Infinity

-   Axiom of Pairing

-   Axiom of Power Set

-   Axiom of Reducibility

-   Axiom of Regularity

-   Axiom of Replacement

-   Axiom of Separation

-   Axiom of Union

-   Axiom Schema of Comprehension

-   Axiom Schema of Replacement

-   Axiom Schema of Specification

-   Axioms of Equality

-   Axioms of Euclidean Geometry

-   Axioms of Linear Algebra

-   Axioms of Probability

-   Axioms of Propositional Logic

-   Axioms of Quantum Mechanics

-   Axioms of Real Numbers

-   Axioms of Set Theory

-   Axioms of Topology

-   Backbencher

View all Terms

List of Fallacies

-   The Texas Sharpshooter Fallacy

-   Straw Man fallacy

-   Slippery Slope Fallacy

-   Red Herring Fallacy

-   Post Hoc Fallacy

-   Nirvana Fallacy

-   Naturalistic Fallacy

-   Moralistic Fallacy

-   Modal Fallacies

-   Hasty Generalization

-   False Dilemma Fallacies

-   False Dichotomy Structure

-   Fallacy of Relevance

-   Fallacy of equivocation

-   Fallacy of Division

-   Fallacy of Composition

-   Fallacy of Ambiguity

-   Definist Fallacy

-   Begging the Question Fallacy

-   Argument Ad Baculum

View all Fallacies

List of Paradoxes

-   Zipf’s Paradox

-   Zero-Sum Game

-   Zero Risk Bias

-   Zeno’s Paradoxes

-   Zeigarnik Effect

-   Two Generals’ Problem

-   Twin Earth Paradox

    []
    []

-   Trolley Problem

-   Third Person Effect

-   The Utility Monster

-   The Unprovable Assertion Paradox

-   The Unobservable Reality Paradox

-   The Unknowable Truth Paradox

-   The Unjustifiable Belief Paradox

-   The Unfalsifiable Hypothesis Paradox

-   The Unattainable Ideal Paradox

-   The Unachievable Goal Paradox

-   The Speckled Hen

-   The Selfish Altruist Paradox

-   The Prisoner’s Dilemma

View all Paradoxes

Thank you for visiting our Philosophy website! Privacy Policy and TOS
pages.
