Open in app[]

Sign up

Sign in

[]

[]

[]

Write

[]

Sign up

Sign in

[]

Mastodon

The Origin of Guilt, Punishment and Bad Conscience According to Nietzsche

[Qais Alamdar]

Qais Alamdar

·

Follow

11 min read

·

Jan 19, 2022

[]

--

[]

[]

[]

Listen

[]

Share

Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, German Philosopher & Philologist

In his Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche dives into the origin of morals
starting with two forms of morality in the first essay; the master
morality and the slave morality. In order to understand the subject of
this essay that discusses the origin of guilt and bad conscience, it is
vital to briefly demonstrate the first essay because the second essay is
followed by the latter. In the first essay of the Genealogy of Morals,
Nietzsche demonstrates the origin of good and evil and that there are
two opposing moralities. Nietzsche names them the ‘master morality and
the ‘slave morality. The master morality is associated with strength,
confidence, wealth and power, whereas the slave morality is associated
with weak, powerless, poor and ugly.

Nietzsche argues that master morality does not hold grudges or deterred
by the actions of others — it holds its position and is focused on doing
the things that it wants and always believes in the possibility of
things. On the contrary, the slave morality is weak and therefore, it
holds grudges against the strong. The slave morality thinks that not
everything is possible because the strong always win; the slave
morality, therefore, becomes jealous, vengeful and seeks revenge from
the strong powered by ressentiment. “All noble morality grows out of a
triumphant saying, ‘yes’ to itself, slave morality says ‘no’ on
principle to everything that is ‘outside’, ‘other’, ‘non-self’: and this
‘no’ is its creative deed. This reversal of the evaluating glance — this
inevitable orientation to the outside instead of back onto itself — is a
feature of ressentiment.” (The Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of
Morality: A Polemic, p400)

In the second essay of the Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche argues that
humans and their nature are different from the rest of the animals. It
is because of the ability to make promises that makes a human different,
superior and organised from other species on earth. The ability to
remember the promises made at a certain point under a specific
condition; ought to be delivered at a particular time in future. This
promise has different connotations within an individual, a society and a
global realm. The individual realm is concerned with direct interaction
between two individuals, society and the world in itself. It is because
the individual makes a promise at different levels. For instance, it
promises another individual to do a thing at a specific time in the
future. Whilst, the individual also makes a promise to a society that
creates a relationship between the two, as Rousseau calls it ‘social
contract’.

In society, an individual makes a promise not to break the law. This
promise in itself is a social contract, according to Rousseau. Moreover,
according to Nietzsche, breaking a promise is thus the origin of ‘guilt’
where the promise-breaker forgets to uphold the promise that he/she
made. “Like a doorkeeper, or guardian of mental order, rest and
etiquette: from which we can immediately see how there could be no
happiness, cheerfulness, hope, pride, immediacy, without forgetfulness.”
(The Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p408).
However, this forgetfulness can happen in two ways. One which the
promise-breaker truly forgets and the second in which the
promise-breaker breaks his/her promise intentionally, not because of
forgetting it but forgetting it intentionally. The other end to
forgetfulness is the sense of ignorance which leads to more happiness as
the consciousness of the human forgot or yet to learn about the things
that cause unhappiness. As they say, the wiser the human becomes, the
less happy he/she is.

One of the reasons behind humans as a superior species is their free
will and the sovereign soul that makes decisions based on his/her
choice. Hence, Nietzsche argues that “this sovereign — how could he
remain ignorant of his superiority over everybody else who is not
permitted to make a promise or answer for himself, how much trust, fear
and respect he arouses — he ‘merits’ all three.” (The Nietzsche Reader,
On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p409). The point in which a
person makes a promise is not only to another person, but he should also
‘answer for himself’ for instance: I will do this or that. The
terminology of ‘I will’ means that ‘I promise’ refers to an action of
the future. However, a human breaks too many promises of himself but
breaking a promise for another person will lead to a severe sense of
guilt. The human’s consciousness will push through to uphold the
promise. “What will he call his dominant instinct, assuming that he
needs a word for it? No doubt about the answer: this sovereign man calls
it his conscience.” (The Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of Morality:
A Polemic, p409).

Nietzsche describes the parties involved in the promise as the creditor
and debtor, where the debtor repays the creditor in the form of
punishment in which pain could be extracted. The exchange in which pain
as a form of debt is extracted from the debtor pays the creditor,
according to Nietzsche, is pleasurable. However, Nietzsche makes another
argument that concerns memory and has to do with the idea of
forgetfulness. “Only something which continues to hurt stays in the
memory — that is a proposition from the oldest (and unfortunately the
longest-lived) psychology on earth.” (The Nietzsche Reader, On the
Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p410). Often in punishing individuals,
the psychology behind it is that it will stay in the memory of both the
observer and the subject — it shall prevent the individual from
committing a crime but also give a lesson for the rest of society that
they will be punished for their involvement in the act of crime.
However, this is not what Nietzsche wants to bring into the modern
world. Rather, he dives into the genealogy of justice and morality
practised in ancient times through the relationship of creditor and
debtor. Thus, the debtor is the person who holds ‘guilt’ or is guilty of
breaking the law or promise. The debtor should repay the creditor in the
form that substitutes the debtor’s benefits. It can be extended to
different realms of society. For instance: the creditor can be a
religious, king or a rich person and debtor based on the contract he/she
has must repay for what substitutes for the sin he/she has committed.
This can be money, food, freedom or the debtor’s body (something the
debtor owns) that when the debtor is unable to pay the creditor, the
things that the debtor owns will substitute instead as a form of
payment. However, Nietzsche argues in case when the debtor puts his body
as a substitute “in particular, the creditor could inflict all kinds of
dishonour and torture on the body of the debtor, for example, cutting as
much flesh off as seemed appropriate for the debt.” (The Nietzsche
Reader, On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p412). This could
result in the death of the debtor.

Furthermore, the relationship between creditor and debtor is the primary
but profound legal form to keep the order within a community. Thus, it
evolved over time and changed to a system of justice in which criminals
are punished for the act that harmed the creditor. This act could harm
the creditor and the community the debtor belongs to as a whole;
therefore, the punishment is necessary to prevent such acts in the
future from other community members. In contrast, Nietzsche argues that
“it was out of anger over some wrong which had been suffered, directed
at the perpetrator, — but this anger was held in check and modified by
the idea that every injury has its equivalent which can be paid in
compensation, if only through the pain of the person who injures” (The
Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p412). The
punishment will not prevent future wrong acts, but it expresses that
every wrong act has a price, and in a system of justice, whether ancient
or modern — the price is measured according to the time, age, duration
and consequences of the wrong act of the doer. The punishment marks in
the debtor’s memory, and through pain, the memory lasts for quite a long
time. However, the memory of the pain may vanish or be forgotten at a
certain point in future, but the other aspect that Nietzsche touched
upon briefly is the humiliation of the debtor by the creditor. The
psychology of humiliation extends; it will make the debtor disappear
from the public eyes after receiving the punishment in the public arena.
For example, the extrajudicial beating, denigrating and shaving the
heads of thieves in public spaces by the Taliban in Afghanistan as seen
in the 21st century where they not only punish them but parade the
criminals on the streets. These criminals, however, receive physical
punishment, but the humiliation in the public spaces will have
exponential psychological consequences both for the public observers and
the criminals at the same time.

The debtor’s price in a developing country is higher than in a rich
country. Today, the punishment of the debtor is crueler in poorer
communities around the world. However, it is profoundly connected with
the amount of pleasure the creditor receives from the punishment of the
debtor. Because, some of the rich countries, too, participate in getting
pleasure from inflicting pain on the debtor, “to make someone suffer, —
a true feast, something which, as I mentioned, rose in price the more it
contrasted with the rank and social position of the creditor.” (The
Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p413).
Because the creditor feels threatened for his position, he will hold the
law in his hand to extract as much pain from the debtor as his societal
position allows him to. This extraction of pain is pleasurable for the
creditor; it is not a direct pleasure but a pleasure of superiority, a
pleasure in which the creditor feels powerful, strong and in a position
of authority. “Through punishment of the debtor, the creditor takes part
in the rights of the masters: at last he, too, shares the elevated
feeling of despising and maltreating someone as an ‘inferior’.” (The
Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p413). This
also becomes problematic as the creditor extends his credits to those
who will most probably be unable to repay the debts, and it is;
therefore, the creditor will enjoy not the pleasure of punishing the
debtor but enjoy having authority and power. Moreover, the extension of
the credits in which those who are unable to repay it will enable the
creditors to enjoy an authority position. Thus, the notion of ‘will to
power’ expands to a deeper discussion for another essay.

Furthermore, the relationship between creditor and debtor has another
crucial element, and it deals with ‘justice’ which is only implemented
by the strong or the creditor. Justice is a term linked with strength,
power and authority; what is just and what is not can only be determined
by the strong — only the strong dictates justice. “Justice at this first
level is the goodwill, between those who are roughly equal, to come to
terms with each other.” (The Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of
Morality: A Polemic, p414) Nietzsche further takes the discussion of
justice to a system that emerges in greater human civilisation with
greater populations. A system of justice is called the ‘court’ where
before anything ruling on the punishment of the debtor, the court is the
place where the debtor is found guilty of not repaying the creditor, or
the creditor who is strong enough can show mercy and forgives the
debtor.

“As a community grows in power, it ceases to take the offence of the
individual quite so seriously, because these do not seem to be as
dangerous and destabilising for the survival of the whole as they did
earlier: the wrong-doer is no longer ‘deprived of peace’ and cast out,
nor can the general public vent their anger on him with the same lack of
constraint, — instead the wrong-doer is carefully shielded by the
community from this anger, especially from that of the immediate injured
party, and given protection.” (The Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy of
Morality: A Polemic, p415)

In another part, Nietzsche argues that “the creditor always becomes more
humane as his wealth increases.” (The Nietzsche Reader, On the Genealogy
of Morality: A Polemic, p416) With the increase of wealth, the creditor
realises that the time spent on the punishment of the weak or the debtor
is merely a waste of time — a time so precious that it may bring more
wealth. Thus, the creditor often suffices with minimum punishment
without the intention of pleasure or a sense of mastery but to keep the
debtor in check. For instance, the death penalty does exist in most
authoritarian regimes, the execution of the political opposition that
damages the regime — making it an excuse to execute any political
opposition. On the other hand, many other countries give the death
penalty only to sporadic and exceptional cases as a form of justice for
the victim and justice for the perpetrator’s guilt. However, there are
other exceptional cases in which the victim forgives the debtor and
reduces the amount of suffering that debtor may face. One can also argue
that punishment will undo the wrong act committed by the debtor. “The
self-sublimation of justice: we know what a nice name it gives itself —
mercy; it remains, of course, the prerogative of the most powerful man,
better still, his way of being beyond the law.” (The Nietzsche Reader,
On the Genealogy of Morality: A Polemic, p416)

On the contrary, most people may be confused with the forms of justice
being applied in different realms of society. As discussed in the first
essay of the Genealogy of Morals by Nietzsche that the revolt of the
slave morality against the strong is out of resentment and jealousy. The
slave morality is vengeful, yet it is not strong physically; therefore,
the slave morality uses religion as a weapon of fear to control and take
revenge from the strong. This will to power of the slave morality is out
of resentment and envy. Hence, when the slave morality is in power, its
justice is reactionary. Justice must not come from a resentful person.
It is not justice in any form or shape but revenge. The law, order, and
justice are only applied to the reactionary people, not the active and
strong. If the revenge of the reactionary takes the shape of justice, it
is without a doubt that it breeds more reactionary people who will seek
revenge for the cruelty they face and call it ‘justice’.

In conclusion, this essay is demonstrated in the second essay of the
Genealogy of Morals by Nietzsche, in which he argues that making a
promise is a skill that only humans possess, this ability to remember
what is owed and when it is due. The relationship that Nietzsche talks
about is between creditor and debtor. Thus, when the debtor breaks his
promise, this broken promise is the origin of ‘guilt’ for Nietzsche, and
in the process, the debtor, before making a promise, must substitute
something in the case if he is unable to repay the debts to the creditor
in any form — which lead us to the notion of justice and how justice can
prevail between the creditor and debtor. After all, Nietzsche’s interest
in the profundity of the elements of justice, guilt or bad conscience
describes how the justice system worked both historically and
psychologically. For Nietzsche, it is not only important to think about
the origin of the above-discussed subjects but also their correlation to
the modern world — the two opposing poles that Nietzsche elaborates on
in his philosophy.

Nietzsche

Philosophy

Morality

Punishment

Guilt

[]

--

[]

--

[]

[]

[]

[Qais Alamdar]

[Qais Alamdar]

Follow

Written by Qais Alamdar

25 Followers

·0 Following

OSINT Investigation & Analysis, Research, SOCMINT and Human Rights

Follow

No responses yet

[]

Help

Status

About

Careers

Press

Blog

Privacy

Terms

Text to speech

Teams
