[Blog]

Insights by LanguageTool

-   Grammar Checker
-   Paraphrasing Tool
-   Premium
-   About

-   Grammar Checker
-   Paraphrasing Tool
-   Premium
-   About

-   English
-   German
-   French
-   Spanish

Check Your Grammar For Free

Instantly enhance your writing in real-time while you type.
With LanguageTool

Get started for free

20% Limited-time discount on Premium! Get discount now

1.  Home
2.  Blog
3.  Word Choice
4.  Explaining The Difference Between “Conscience,” “Conscious,” and
    “Conscientious”

Explaining The Difference Between “Conscience,” “Conscious,” and “Conscientious”

powered by LanguageTool

“Conscience” and “conscious” both relate to the mind, but what about
“conscientious”? This blog post will teach you the difference between
these three commonly confused words.

[(What does conscious mean? What does conscience mean? What does
conscientious mean?)]

Do you know the difference between these three words?

-   Conscience is a noun that means “an inner feeling or voice that
    tells you whether your actions are right or wrong.”
-   Conscious is an adjective that means “aware of and responding to
    one’s surroundings.”
-   Conscientious is an adjective that means “wishing to do what is
    right, especially to do one’s work or duty well and thoroughly.”

In the English language, there are many words and phrases that can be
interchanged, such as despite and in spite of. The words conscience,
conscious, and conscientious do not fall under this category. They look
similar, but they have three distinct definitions. Below, we’ll go over
what each word means and prove example sentences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 What Does “Conscience” Mean?

Conscience /ˈkɑːnʃəns/ is a noun that refers to the “inner feeling or
voice that tells us what is morally right or wrong and impels us towards
right action.”

  I advised my niece to let her conscience guide her.

When someone has a guilty conscience, it means that “they feel guilty
about something they did that they perceive as wrong.”

  My guilty conscience kept me up all night.

On the opposite side of the spectrum, when someone has a clear
conscience, they feel that they did the right thing and therefore feel
no guilt.

  My conscience was clear because I knew I did the right thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What Does “Conscious” Mean?

Conscious /ˈkɑːnʃəs/ is an adjective that means “aware of and responding
to one’s surroundings; awake.”

  When she fell, she hit her head really hard, but luckily, she remained
  conscious.

When one is unconscious, it means that they are not conscious, so they
are “without awareness, sensation, or cognition.”

  My sister was unconscious for three days after the accident.

Conscious can also mean “being acutely and painfully aware of,” or
“sensitive to.”

  He is conscious of his weight gain.

When using conscious in this respect, the opposite is not unconscious.
In other words, if someone is oblivious or unbothered by their weight
gain, you wouldn’t say “He is unconscious about his weight gain.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What Does “Conscientious” Mean?

Conscientious /ˌkɑːnʃiˈenʃəs/ is an adjective commonly used to describe
someone who “takes care to do things carefully and correctly.”

  She was a conscientious student and graduated at the top of her class.

Conscientious also refers to “being governed by conscience to do what’s
right.”

  He is a conscientious lawyer who does not let outside sources stop him
  from doing what is morally right.

Your browser does not support the audio element. Conscience

Your browser does not support the audio element. Conscious

Your browser does not support the audio element. Conscientious

LanguageTool—a multilingual text editor—is conscious of any spelling and
grammar mistakes and will offer corrections. Any conscientious writer
who uses LanguageTool as their writing assistant will have a clear
conscience knowing their text is error-free.

Share on Social Media

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   [Gina]

Gina

Gina holds a Bachelor of Arts in English. With a passion for creating
art with words, she spends her free time reading and writing. And no, we
didn’t force her to say that. You can find her strolling the shorelines
with her loyal canine companion, Mango, or (painfully) cheering on her
favorite team, the Miami Dolphins.

Unleash the Professional Writer in You With LanguageTool

Go well beyond grammar and spell checking. Impress with clear, precise,
and stylistically flawless writing instead.

Get started for free

Works on All Your Favorite Services

-   Chrome
-   Edge
-   Firefox
-   Safari
-   Opera
-   Windows
-   Thunderbird
-   Google Docs
-   Microsoft Word
-   Open Office
-   Libre Office

We Value Your Feedback

We’ve made a mistake, forgotten about an important detail, or haven’t
managed to get the point across? Let’s help each other to perfect our
writing.

[Fortune favors the bold]

Fortune Favors the Bold | Definition & Origin

Fortune favors the bold is an idiom that suggests that taking risks will
pay off. It comes from a Latin phrase audentes fortuna iuvat that dates
back millenia. It encourages the listener not to be fatalistic and
instead to make audacious decisions. Examples: Fortune favors the bold
in a sentence

[Devil's advocate]

Devil’s Advocate | Definition & Examples

Devil’s advocate is an idiom that refers to someone who argues a
contrary view, either for the sake of argument or to help test out how
rigorous a position is. For example, a team of lawyers might get one of
their number to play devil’s advocate and attack

[Piece of cake.]

Piece of Cake | Examples & Meaning

When something is a piece of cake, it is very easy to do. Piece of cake
is an example of an idiom, (i.e., a phrase or group of words that has a
meaning that isn’t immediately obvious from a literal reading of the
words). Nobody really knows where

[]

LanguageTool Check your text quickly and easily. Grammar, punctuation,
style, and spelling.

-   Twitter
-   Facebook
-   Instagram
-   TikTok
-   LinkedIn

Languages

-   Free Spell Checker
-   German Grammar Checker
-   Spanish Grammar Checker
-   French Grammar Checker
-   Portuguese Grammar Checker
-   Dutch Grammar Checker
-   Catalan Grammar Checker

Apps

-   iOS
-   macOS
-   Windows

Browser Add-ons

-   Chrome
-   Microsoft Edge
-   Mozilla Firefox
-   Safari
-   Opera

Office Plugins

-   Google Docs
-   Microsoft Word
-   Apple Pages
-   LibreOffice

E-Mail Add-ons

-   Gmail
-   Apple Mail
-   OutlookBETA
-   Thunderbird

Product

-   Grammar Checker
-   Punctuation Checker
-   Paraphrasing Tool
-   Premium
-   Correct Grammar in Word Documents
-   LanguageTool for Businesses
-   LanguageTool for Non-Profits & Students
-   LanguageTool for Professional Writers
-   Proofreading API
-   Open-Source Development
-   Help Center

Company

-   About Us
-   Media Assets
-   Community
-   OpenThesaurus - Synonyme
-   Source Code
-   Careers

Made with ♥ in Germany, Spain, France, the UK and the Netherlands

-   Privacy
-   Terms & Conditions
-   Imprint
-   Cookie Policy
