[Encyclopedia Britannica]

Search Britannica

Click here to search

[Encyclopedia Britannica]

Search Britannica

Click here to search

SUBSCRIBE

SUBSCRIBE

Login

https://premium.britannica.com/premium-membership/?utm_source=premium&utm_medium=nav-login-box&utm_campaign=evergreen

Subscribe  Now

-   Home
-   History & Society
-   Science & Tech
-   Biographies
-   Animals & Nature
-   Geography & Travel
-   Arts & Culture
-   ProCon
-   Money

-   Games & Quizzes
-   Videos
-   On This Day
-   One Good Fact
-   Dictionary
-   New Articles

History & Society

-   Lifestyles & Social Issues
-   Philosophy & Religion
-   Politics, Law & Government
-   World History

Science & Tech

-   Health & Medicine
-   Science
-   Technology

Biographies

-   Browse Biographies

Animals & Nature

-   Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates
-   Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates
-   Environment
-   Fossils & Geologic Time
-   Mammals
-   Plants

Geography & Travel

-   Geography & Travel

Arts & Culture

-   Entertainment & Pop Culture
-   Literature
-   Sports & Recreation
-   Visual Arts

-   Companions
-   Demystified
-   Image Galleries
-   Lists
-   Podcasts
-   Spotlight
-   Summaries
-   The Forum
-   Top Questions
-   #WTFact

-   Britannica Kids

Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech
Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon
Money Videos

consciousness

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   

    Early views

-   

    The behaviourist view

-   

    Neurophysiological mechanisms

References & Edit History Related Topics

Videos

[Exploring different states of consciousness]

Discover

[Close up of books. Stack of books, pile of books, literature, reading.
Homepage 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society]

12 Novels Considered the “Greatest Book Ever Written”

[Macro of sheet music]

10 Classical Music Composers to Know

[The Colosseum, Rome, Italy. Giant amphitheatre built in Rome under the
Flavian emperors. (ancient architecture; architectural ruins)]

New Seven Wonders of the World

[Aphrodite. Greek mythology. Sculpture. Aphrodite is the Greek goddess
of love and beauty.]

12 Greek Gods and Goddesses

[An ancient egyptian hieroglyphic painted carving showing the falcon
headed god Horus seated on a throne and holding a golden fly whisk.
Before him are the Pharoah Seti and the goddess Isis. Interior wall of
the temple to Osiris at Abydos, Egypt.]

11 Egyptian Gods and Goddesses

[Orange basketball on black background and with low key lighting.
Homepage 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society]

The 10 Greatest Basketball Players of All Time

[Estimated battle casualties, Normandy invasion, World War II. WWII,
D-Day]

Estimated Battle Casualties During the Normandy Invasion and Campaign to
Liberate Paris (June–August 1944)

Contents

Health & Medicine Psychology & Mental Health

consciousness

Ask the Chatbot a Question

More Actions

Print

print Print

Please select which sections you would like to print:

-   Table Of Contents

Cite

verifiedCite

While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there
may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual
or other sources if you have any questions.

Select Citation Style

MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style

Copy Citation

Share

Share

Share to social media

Facebook X

URL

https://www.britannica.com/topic/consciousness

Feedback

External Websites

Feedback

Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to
improve this article (requires login).

Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other

Your Feedback

Submit Feedback

Thank you for your feedback

Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to
revise the article.

External Websites

-   University of Virginia - School of Medicine - Consciousness -- What
    Is It? (PDF)
-   Rebus Community - Introduction to Philosophy: Philosophy of Mind -
    Consciousness
-   Frontiers - Human Consciousness: Where is it from and what is it for
-   National Center for Biotechnology Information - PubMed Central -
    Conscience and Consciousness: a definition
-   Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Consciousness
-   Social Sciences Libretexts - Consciousness
-   Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Consciousness
-   LOUIS Pressbooks - Introduction to Psychology - What Is
    Consciousness?
-   University of Saskatchewan Pressbooks - States of Consciousness
-   Verywell Mind - Consciousness in Psychology

Ask the Chatbot a Question

Written and fact-checked by

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they
have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by
working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write
new content and verify and edit content received from contributors.

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Last Updated: Dec 19, 2024 • Article History

Table of Contents

Table of Contents

Ask the Chatbot a Question

Key People:
    Edmund Husserl
    Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling
    Meher Baba
    Daniel C. Dennett
    T.H. Green

(Show more)

Related Topics:
    unconscious
    introspection
    sensation
    stream of consciousness
    preconscious

(Show more)

On the Web:
    University of Virginia - School of Medicine - Consciousness -- What
    Is It? (PDF) (Dec. 19, 2024)

(Show more)

See all related content

consciousness, a psychological condition defined by the English
philosopher John Locke as “the perception of what passes in a man’s own
mind.”

(Read Yuval Noah Harari’s Britannica essay on “Nonconscious Man.”)

Early views

In the early 19th century the concept was variously considered. Some
philosophers regarded it as a kind of substance, or “mental stuff,”
quite different from the material substance of the physical world.
Others thought of it as an attribute characterized by sensation and
voluntary movement, which separated animals and men from lower forms of
life and also described the difference between the normal waking state
of animals and men and their condition when asleep, in a coma, or under
anesthesia (the latter condition was described as unconsciousness).
Other descriptions included an analysis of consciousness as a form of
relationship or act of the mind toward objects in nature, and a view
that consciousness was a continuous field or stream of essentially
mental “sense data,” roughly similar to the “ideas” of earlier empirical
philosophers.

[epilepsy]

More From Britannica

nervous system disease: Altered consciousness

The method employed by most early writers in observing consciousness was
introspection—looking within one’s own mind to discover the laws of its
operation. The limitations of the method became apparent when it was
found that because of differing preconceptions, trained observers in the
laboratory often could not agree on fundamental observations.

The behaviourist view

The failure of introspection to reveal consistent laws led to the
rejection of all mental states as proper subjects of scientific study.
In behaviourist psychology, derived primarily from work of the American
psychologist John B. Watson in the early 1900s, the concept of
consciousness was irrelevant to the objective investigation of human
behaviour and was doctrinally ignored in research. Neobehaviourists,
however, adopted a more liberal posture toward mentalistic states such
as consciousness.

Neurophysiological mechanisms

That consciousness depends on the function of the brain has been known
from ancient times. Although detailed understanding of the neural
mechanisms of consciousness has not been achieved, correlations between
states of consciousness and functions of the brain are possible. Levels
of consciousness in terms of levels of alertness or responsiveness are
correlated with patterns of electrical activity of the brain (brain
waves) recorded by an electroencephalograph. During wide-awake
consciousness the pattern of brain waves consists of rapid irregular
waves of low amplitude or voltage. In contrast, during sleep, when
consciousness can be said to be minimal, the brain waves are much slower
and of greater amplitude, often coming in periodic bursts of slow waxing
and waning amplitude.

Both behavioral levels of consciousness and the correlated patterns of
electrical activity are related to the function of a part of the
brainstem called the reticular formation. Electrical stimulation of the
ascending reticular systems arouses a sleeping cat to alert
consciousness and simultaneously activates its brain waves to the waking
pattern.

[]

Get Unlimited Access

Try Britannica Premium for free and discover more.

Subscribe

It was once supposed that the neurophysiological mechanisms subserving
consciousness and the higher mental processes must reside in the cortex.
It is more likely, however, that the cortex serves the more specialized
functions of integrating patterns of sensory experience and organizing
motor patterns and that the ascending reticular system represents the
neural structures most critically related to consciousness. The
brainstem reticular formation should not, however, be called the seat of
consciousness. It represents an integrative focus, functioning through
its widespread interconnections with the cortex and other regions of the
brain. See also introspection; unconscious.

This article was most recently revised and updated by Amy Tikkanen.
